=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
14. NASA STUDIES ON EFFECT OF GROOVED RUNWAY OPERATIONS
ON AIRCRAFT VIBRATIONS AND TIRE WEAR
By Thomas J. Yager
NASA Langley Research Center
SUMMARY
Some tire tread wear data obtained from tests conducted at the Langley landing-
loads track for a variety of aircraft tire sizes and types on various transversely grooved
surfaces are presented and discussed. Comparative tire tread wear data and main strut
vibration data obtained during the McDonnell Douglas F-4D and Convair 990 aircraft tests
on grooved and ungrooved surfaces at the landing research runway at NASA Wallops
Station are also discussed. Within the test limitations of these studies the results indi-
cate that transversely grooved runway surfaces do not significantly increase aircraft
vibrations or tire tread wear.
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to discuss the effects of transverse runway grooves on
aircraft tire tread wear and aircraft vibrations. Tire tread wear data obtained with
various aircraft tires tested at the Langley landing-loads track and the landing research
runway at NASA Wallops Station are presented. Vibration data obtained from vertical
accelerometers mounted on the right main strut of the F-4D and 990 aircraft during the
full-scale tests at NASA Wallops Station are also presented.
AIRCRAFT TIRE TREAD WEAR
During normal aircraft operations on a relatively high friction level surface, some
tread wear, cutting, and/or damage occurs. The extent or magnitude of this tire tread
degradation is dependent on several different factors, some of which are as follows:
(1) Pavement texture or roughness
(2) Pavement contaminants
(3) Tread type and construction
(4) Amount of skidding
(5) Loading
189



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Pavement texture or roughness and the amount and type of pavement contaminants,
such as water, slush, ice, dirt, oil, or rubber deposits, directly affect the level of friction
developed between the tire and pavement that causes tire tread wear. Tire tread type
and construction (that is, whether the tire has all rubber tread or fabric-reinforced rub-
ber tread) also affect the susceptibility of the tread to shear or cut. The wear associated
with skidding depends on the amount of time a tire is subjected to finite slip ratios, the
slip-ratio value, and the drag load. (See ref. 1.) Tire loading includes the amount and
the variation of tire loading such as occurs at touchdown or during abrupt changes in the
friction level developed between the tire and the pavement.
In an attempt to determine the effect of transverse pavement grooves on aircraft
tire tread wear and cutting, tests with various types of aircraft tires were made at the
landing-loads track. Figure 1 shows the results obtained with a 3-groove fabric-
reinforced 30 X 11.5-14.5, type VIII, aircraft tire during a low-speed (4 knots) braking
test run on the 1- x 1/4- X 1/8-inch transversely grooved test surface for a dry surface
condition. The test tire was inflated to 210 lb/inz and the test was conducted at Oo yaw.
As shown in the photographs of figure 1, tread rubber was deposited on the test surface
but the tire tread did not receive any cuts or damage during this run from a free-rolling
condition to a locked-wheel condition. Some tread wear, however, did occur at relatively
high slip-ratio values. In contrast to the normal trend observed on smooth surface run-
ways where the rubber deposits adhered to the surface, the tread rubber deposited in the
dry surface grooves during locked-wheel braking was powdery or granular in form and
could be easily brushed away.
Comparative braking test runs at a ground speed of 4 knots were also made on
grooved and ungrooved surfaces for damp conditions. The grooved concrete surface had
a groove configuration of 1 X 1/4 X 1/8 inch. The ungrooved surface was a bituminous
asphalt overlay containing abrasive aggregate material. The aircraft tire used in these
tests had a fabric-reinforced rubber tread and was constrained to run at 4' yaw. Results
obtained from these tests are shown in figures 2 and 3.
As indicated by the photographs of the tire skid area, some tire wear occurred for
locked-wheel conditions on the 1- x 1/4- X 1/8-inch grooved surface, but on the ungrooved
abrasive asphalt surface for the same test conditions, substantial damage to the tire tread
occurred. Some of the tread cuts resulting from the braking run on the ungrooved sur-
face were as deep as the tire cord. Considerable side force was developed by this test
tire at 4O yaw during the run prior to the locked-wheel condition but no other tread wear
or cu ing occurred except for that shown in figures 2 and 3.
' \ \
After the braking runs with this tire, the tread deposit on the grooved test surface
was also composed of powdery or granular rubber particles which could be easily brushed
190



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
off. On the ungrooved surface the tire tread deposit consisted of rubber and fabric in an
abraded form which could also be brushed off.
By using a new 30 X 11.5- 14.5, type VIII, aircraft tire, a braking test run at
102 knots was made at the landing-loads track to evaluate further the effect of pavement
grooves on tire tread wear. The test tire had a 3-groove fabric-reinforced rubber tread,
and the variation in friction developed between the tire and the grooved pavement during
braking is shown as a function of slip ratio in figure 4. The damp test surface was
grooved 1 X 3/8 X 1/4 inch. Figure 5 shows the 5-fOOt-lOng rubber deposit from the
tread on this grooved surface and the tire tread damage area resulting from the braking
run. By measuring the length of the tread damage area and by calculating the rolling
circumference and angular velocity of the tire, it was determined that the surface rubber
deposit was initiated at a slip ratio of about 0.8. Prior to this point in the braking cycle.
no significant tread wear occurred. The tire tread wear and the chevron-type cuts shown
in figure 5 occurred between slip ratios of 0.8 and 1.0. Therefore, the results of this
test indicate that to minimize tire tread wear and cutting, high slip-ratio values should
be avoided during aircraft ground operations.
In order to evaluate further the type and extent of the tire tread damage, locked-
wheel tests were conducted at the track with a smooth 49 X 17, type VII, all rubber tread
tire. The data obtained from these testb are shown in figure 6.
The time histories of the variation of slip ratio and drag friction coefficient pdrag
shown in figure 6 were obtained at a speed of 100 knots on 10 different grooved and
ungrooved surfaces for damp and flooded conditions. The high friction that developed
between the tire and the 1- X 1/4- X 1/4-inch grooved surface (fig. 6) exceeded the torque
limitations of the brake system used on the test carriage and resulted in partial wheel
spin-up as indicated by the variation in slip ratio. The other ungrooved and grooved test
surfaces, which were flailed-type grooves of 1/8-inch depth, did not develop sufficient
friction to overcome the brake torque limitation. The slip-ratio value of 1.0 indicates
that the wheel remained locked on the other test surfaces for damp and flooded conditions.
The condition of the tire tread as a result of the locked-wheel runs is shown in fig-
ure 7. The numerous, small chevron-type cuts in the all rubber tread of the smooth
49 x 17, type VII, test tire did not exceed 0.06 inch in depth. In subsequent test runs with
this tire, the results indicated that these chevron-type cuts did not significantly impair
the tire tread life.
These chevron-type cuts in the tire tread were also observed during the tests of the
990 aircraft on the landing research runway. Figure 8 shows the condition of the tire and
surface after a firm touchdown of the 990 aircraft on dry grooved concrete. The aircraft
was equipped with new 5-groove all rubber tread main tires. Although only the right
191



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
main gear touchdown area is shown here, the left main gear touchdown area showed simi-
lar rubber deposits and all eight main gear tires had similar tread cut areas. In ana-
lyzing these results, the width of the rubber deposit on the runway at the point of initial
touchdown equaled the width of the tread cut area on the main tires. Since the tires did
not have any other cutting around the tread and the rubber deposit on the runway is shown
to increase in width, it would indicate that the chevron-type cuts shown in figure 8
occurred only at initial touchdown when the tire was stationary. As soon as wheel spin-
up started, the tire tread had no further cutting.
During the maximum antiskid braking tests of the F-4D aircraft, some tire tread
wear was experienced but no chevron-type cutting was observed. However, no prolonged
wheel lockups occurred during the braking tests of the F-4D, and the main tires of the
F-4D had a 3-groove fabric-reinforced rubber tread. During the maximum braking tests
of the 990 aircraft on wet and flooded surfaces, prolonged wheel lockups occurred on the
ungrooved surfaces particularly with the smooth all rubber tread main tires. Because
of the normal test run procedure of applying maximum antiskid braking through adjacent
ungrooved and grooved tests surfaces, chevron-type cuts developed on the tire tread
when the tire encountered the grooved surface at locked-wheel conditions. Some of the
smooth tire tread cuts are shown in figure 9. No further cutting occurred during maxi-
mum braking test runs from a grooved to an adjacent ungrooved surface. Approximately
50 maximum antiskid braking test runs were made with the chevron cuts in the tire tread.
Again the maximum measured depth of these cuts did not exceed 0.06 inch. As a result
of further braking tests, these cuts increased in number but did not increase in depth.
In summary, the tests at the landing-loads track and the aircraft tests on the landing
research runway have shown that tire tread wear and/or cuts occur on grooved and
ungrooved pavements. The extent or magnitude of tire tread wear or cutting appears to
be greatest at or near the locked-wheel condition. The small chevron-type cuts in the
aircraft tire tread occurred only at touchdown, when the tire was stationary, or under a
locked-wheel condition on a high friction level surface. It can be theorized that at very
high slip- ratio values, particularly at the locked-wheel condition, local tension failures
of the tread rubber result in the chevron-type cuts. These test results indicate, however,
that tire tread life is not significantly impaired because of the chevron-type cutting.
AIRCRAFT VIBRATION
Two vertical accelerometers were mounted on the right main landing gear strut of
the F-4D and 990 aircraft during the tests made on the landing research runway to deter-
mine the effect of transverse runway grooves on aircraft vibration. An accelerometer
192



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
was mounted on the upper section of the main strut close to the wing; another accelerom-
eter was mounted on the lower section of the main strut close to the wheel or wheels.
The upper strut accelerometer had a natural frequency of 1000 cycles per second, and the
lower strut accelerometer had a natural frequency of 3000 cycles per second. Some typi-
cal vibrations obtained from these strut accelerometers during the tests of the F-4D air-
craft on grooved and ungrooved surfaces are shown in figures 10 and 11.
The upper and lower strut accelerometer traces shown in figure 10 were obtained
for free-rolling conditions on dry ungrooved and grooved concrete. These data show that
the magnitude of the lower strut vibration is greater than that measured at the upper strut
on both test surfaces. As the aircraft ground speed increased from 61.5 to 96.0 knots
(fig. ll),t he amplitude of the strut vibrations also increased. No change in amplitude
could be observed when results obtained on grooved and ungrooved surfaces at the same
speed were compared. When the time scales of figures 10 and 11 were expanded, no sig-
nificant difference was measured in the frequency of the lower strut vibration on the dry
grooved surface as compared with the dry ungrooved surface at both test speeds.
Strut accelerometer data similar to the data for the F-4D aircraft were obtained at
speeds of 83 knots and 123 knots during the tests of the 990 aircraft on grooved and
ungrooved surfaces as shown by the examples in figures 12 and 13. The magnitude of the
strut vibrations for the 990 aircraft on dry grooved and ungrooved asphalt at both test
speeds is less than that shown for the F-4D aircraft in figures 10 and 11. As in the case
of the vibration data of the F-4D aircraft, no significant difference was measured in the
frequency or amplitude of the lower strut vibration of the 990 aircraft on the dry grooved
surface as compared with the dry ungrooved surface at both test speeds. On the basis of
these test results, it is believed that grooved runways do not significantly alter aircraft
vibration.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Braking tests using several types of aircraft tires were conducted at the Langley
landing-loads track on various grooved and ungrooved surfaces. The result&i ndicated
that the grooves caused no significant increase in tire wear or tire damage. Tire tread
degradation, however, was found to increase at the higher slip ratios and was greatest
during the locked-wheel skid condition. Full-scale aircraft tests conducted on the landing
research runway at NASA Wallops Station substantiated these test results and furthermore
indicated that the chevron-type cuts that were developed in the tire tread at the higher slip
ratios on the grooved surfaces did not reduce tire tread life. Aircraft strut vibrations
measured during operations on 1- x 1/4- X 1/4-inch transversely grooved surfaces were
found to be the same as those measured on ungrooved surfaces. Full-scale tests at the
193



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
landing research runway for a variety of additional aircraft types and tire loadings are
planned to obtain further evaluations of the effect of grooved runway operations on air-
craft vibrations and tire tread wear.
REFERENCE
1. Batterson, Sidney A.: A Study of the Dynamics of Airplane Braking Systems as
Affected by Tire Elasticity and Brake Response. NASA TN D-3081, 1965.
194



=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Figure 1.- Condition of grooved surface and tire after braking test. 3- roove fabric-
reinforced 30 X 11.5-14.5, type VIII, tire; inflation pressure, 210 lbIn2; dry surface;
ground speed, 4 knots; 00 yaw.
Figure 2.- Condition of grooved surface and tire after braking test. Fabric-reinforced
rubber tread tire; inflation pressure, 400 Ib/inZ; damp surface; ground speed, 4 knots;
40 yaw.
19 5



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Figure 3.- Condition of ungrooved surface and tire after braking test. Fabric-reinforced
rubber tread tire; inflation pressure, 400 Ib/in2; damp surface; ground speed, 4 knots;
4O yaw.
-
.4 ON RUNWAY
*-D-u--un
FR 1 CTIO N I
COEFFICIENT, -2 -d
P ' P
I
I
Figure 4.- F-4D aircraft tire during braking on grooved surface. 30 X 11.5-14.5, type VI I I,
tire; damp concrete; ground speed, 102 knots.
196



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Figure 5.- Condition of test surface and tire after braking.
-G- DAMP
-eF-LOOD ED
(0.1 TO 0.3 in.)
.6
.4
I-ldrag
.2
0 .2 .4 .6 1.0 1.2
TIME. sec
I I I I I
0 50 100 150 200
BRAKING DISTANCE, ft
Figure 6.- Comparison of locked-wheel braking on various test surfaces. Smooth 49 X 17,
type VII, tire; inflation pressure, 170 Ib/in2; ground speed, 100 knots: yaw angle, 40.
197



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Figure 7.- Condition of tire tread after locked-wheel runs.
Figure 8.- Condition of grooved surface and tire tread after firm touchdown of 990 aircraft.
Dry concrete; inflation pressure, 160 Ib/in?
198



=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Figure 9.- Effect of braking tests on smooth main tire tread of 990 aircraft. 41 X 15.0-18,
type VIII, main tires; inflation pressure, 160 Ib/in?
-15 t-UNGROOVED+ROOVED- j
r
"15 i /-RUBBER BELT DAM
I
ACCEL, 0
g units -5
' I I
- l o p LOWER STRUT
-15
I I I I I I I
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
TIME, sec
Figure 10.- Free-rolling vibrations from main strut of F-4D aircraft. Dry concrete;
ground speed, 61.5 knots.
199



=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
15 r
VERTICAL
ACCEL, 0 UPPER STRUT
g units -5
I I I 1 1 1
0 1 2 3 4 5
TIME, sec
Figure 11.- Free-rolling vibrations from main strut of F-4D aircraft. Dry concrete;
ground speed, 96.0 knots.
-B/
VERTICAL
ACCEL , UPPER STRUT
g units -.25
ACCEL , ILOWER STRUT
g units --.2.5
50
-.
75
I I I 1 1 1
0 1 2 3 4 5
TIME, sec
Figure 12.- Free-rolling vibrations from main strut of 990 aircraft. Dry asphalt;
ground speed, 83 knots.
200



=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
UPPER STRUT
NGROOVED-------G ROOVED-
I
..5705
-.75 L
I I I I
0 1 2 3 4
TIME, sec
Figure 13.- Free-rolling vibrations from main strut of 990 aircraft. Dry asphalt;
ground speed, 123 knots.
201
