=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
NASA TN D-1376
CD
r:
M
~
I
Q
.Z... .
<
en
<
Z
TECHNICAL NOTE
D-1376
INFLUENCE OF TIRE TREAD PATTERN AND RUNWAY SURFACE
CONDITION ON BRAKING FRICTION AND ROLLING
RESISTANCE OF A MODERN AIRCRAFT TIRE
By Walter B. Horne and Trafford J. W. Leland
Langley Research Center
Langley Station, Hampton, Va.
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON September 1962



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SUMMARY ... 1
INTRODUCTION 1
SYMBOIS ••• 3
APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE 5
TEST FIXTURE 5
TIRES •••• 6
WHEEL BRAKE . 6
RUNWAY TROUGHS AND SURFACES 7
RUNWAY WETNESS . . . . . 7
OTHER RUNWAY CONTAMINANTS 8
INSTRUMENTATION . . . 8
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 9
DEFINITION OF TERMS • 9
Instantaneous Drag Force 9
Vertical Ground Force 10
Brake Torque . . . . . . 10
Deflected Tire Radius . . 10
Movement of Vertical-Load Center of Pressure 10
Footprint Area . . . . 10
Wheel Moment of Inertia . . . . . 11
Slip Ratio ........... . 11
Tire-Ground Friction Coefficient 11
MECHANICS OF THE ROLLING TIRE 12
Unbraked Rolling 12
Dry runways . 12
Wet runways . 13
Braked Rolling 16
AUTOMATIC BRAKING DEVICES 17
DISCUSSION OF PARAMETERS 19
ROLLING RESISTANCE 19
FWID-DISPLACEMENT DRAG. 20
Single or Leading Tandem Wheels 20
Rear Tandem Wheels . . . . 21
BRAKING DRAG ......•... 21
MOVEMENT OF VERTICAL-LOAD CENTER OF PRESSURE 21
WHEEL SPIN-UP AND SPIN-OOWN . . . . . . . . . . 22
i



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Page
INSTANTANEOUS TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT 23
MAXIMUM TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT 23
Dry Runways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Contaminated Runways . . . . . . . . . . 24
FUlJrSKID TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT 24
Dry Runways . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Water-Covered Runways . . . . . . 25
AVERAGE TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT . 26
Dry Runways . . .. .... 26
Contaminated Runways . . . . . . . 26
Runway composition and surface . 26
Type and depth of contaminant on runway 27
Vertical ground load acting on tire 28
Tire inflation pressure . . . . . . • . 29
Tire position in tandem wheel arrangements 29
Tire tread material . . . . 29
Tire tread pattern . . . . . 30
Smooth and dimple treads . 30
Circumferential rib treads 31
Other treads 32
TIRE TREAD WEAR 32
SUMMARY OF RESULTS 33
APPENDIX. 35
REFERENCES 37
TABLE I 39
FIGURES 40
ii



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
_--
-~---------~--- ...
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
TECHNICAL NOTE D-1376
INFLUENCE OF TIRE TREAD PATTERN AND RUNWAY SURFACE
CONDITION ON BRAKING FRICTION AND ROLLING
RESISTANCE OF A MODERN AIRCRAFT TIRE
By Walter B. Horne and Trafford J. W. Leland
SUMMARY
A series of taxiing tests was conducted at the Langley landing
loads track with both braked and unbraked (freely rolling) single and
tandem wheels equipped with 32x8.8 type VII aircraft tires of dif
ferent tread designs to obtain data on tire and braking characteristics
during operation on dry and on contaminated concrete and asphalt run
ways. Contaminants used were water, slush, JP-4 jet fuel, and organic
and detergent fire- extinguishing foams. Forward velocities for the
tests ranged from approximately 13 to 104 knots. Vertical loads of
approximately 9,000 to 22,000 pounds and tire inflation pressures of
85 to 350 pounds per square inch were used.
Results indicated that the unbraked tire rolling resistance
increased with increasing forward velocity on dry and on contaminated
runway surfaces. Peak tire-ground friction coefficients developed
during wheel braking decreased rapidly with increasing velocity on
contaminated runways but remained relatively unchanged on dry runways
as the forward velocity was increased. Dry-runway friction coeffi
cients were found to be relatively insensitive to tire tread pattern.
However, the magnitude of the friction coefficients developed by tires
on contaminated runways was extremely sensitive to the tire tread pat
tern used, with circumferential-groove treads developing the highest
values of friction coefficient, and smooth and dimple treads the lowest
values for the tread patterns and runway conditions investigated.
INTRODUCTION
It has been recognized for many years that the presence of contam
inating fluids such as slush, water, and oil on airport runways tends
to impair landing and take-off performance of aircraft. Previous NASA
work on tire performance under adverse runway conditions is reported in
references 1 to 7. British work on this subject, in which a full-scaie
t
I
I
I
1_ ___



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
--- - -------
jet-fighter airplane was used} is reported in references 8 and 9. This
degradation in performance due to contamination has been tolerated with
propeller-type aircraft because only rarely are operations made unsafe
by the presence of these contaminants. Operations of military jet air
craft and of the recently introduced jet-powered commercial transport
aircraft} on the other hand} have proved to be much more affected by run
way contaminants than operations of the propeller-type aircraft. Several
factors are responsible for the difference in the effect of contaminated
runways on the ground performance of the two types of aircraft. The main
factors are the higher landing and take-off velocities required of the
jets} and their generally lower acceleration and deceleration character
istics while on the ground.
Operation on fluid-contaminated runways affects aircraft performance
in several ways. First} the retardation forces developed by aircraft
wheels when taking off from slush- or water-covered runways increase the
take-off distance required by the airplane and under certain conditions
would prevent the airplane from obtaining the required take-off velocity
(ref. 2). Second} the high-velocity spray of slush or water originating
from the airplane wheels can be damaging to the surfaces of the airplane
that are under spray impingement. Third} under certain conditions of
vertical load} tire-inflation pressure} and forward velocity} airplane
tires on slush- or water-covered runways reach a condition called hydro
planing during which the hydrodynamic lift force developed between the
tire footprint and the fluid-covered runway surface equals or exceeds
the vertical reaction of the airplane mass acting on the tire. During
hydroplaning the tire loses contact with the runway surface and thus
loses its directional stability and braking effectiveness. Fourth} at
subhydroplaning velocities the friction coefficients developed between
aircraft tires and the ground during braking on fluid-contaminated run
ways are considerably reduced from values obtained on dry runways.
Many investigations under various test conditions have been made of
the effects of water or other runway contaminants on the performance of
tires . In some of these investigations small tires were used} some of
the investigations were confined to low speeds} and in some investiga
tions in which full-scale airplanes were used} difficulty was experienced
in maintaining test conditions constant. The presently described inves
tigation extends the range of controlled tests to a higher speed and
weight combination. This investigation under controlled conditions was
performed at the Langley landing-loads track (track described in ref. 10)
to determine the effect of forward velocity; type of runway surface;
tire-tread material} pattern} and wear; and type of runway contaminant
on the braked and unbraked rolling characteristics of aircraft tires on
single and tandem wheels. Some of the preliminary experimental data
obtained from this investigation were used in references 1 and 2 to
demonstrate the degrading effects of runway slush and water on the take
off and landing performance of several typical jet aircraft.
2
----_.- - ----- -- -



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
It is the purpose of this paper to describe the investigation in
more detail than was done in references 1 and 2 so that the degradation
of braking effectiveness on contaminated runway surfaces may be more
fully understood. It will be demonstrated that tread designs or patterns
used on tires have little effect on tire and braking performance on dry
runways but have a very substantial effect on contaminated runways.
SYMBOIS
gross footprint area of tire, sq in.
net footprint area of tire, sq in.
hydrodynamic lift coefficient (dimensionless)
hydrodynamic drag coefficient (dimensionless)
tire constant; 0.02 for type I tires and 0.03 for type III
and VII tires (obtained from ref. 12)
depth of contaminant on runway surface, in.
instantaneous horizontal (drag) force at wheel axle, lb
instantaneous horizontal (drag) force acting on tire at
ground, Fx,g,r + Fx,g,b + Fx,g,f' lb
F braking drag (portion of Fx,g contributed by forcing tire
x,g,b
to roll at values of sl > 0 either by wheel braking or by
other means), lb
Fx, g, f fluid-displacement drag (portion of Fx,g contributed by
horizontal component of hydrodynamic force due to runway
contaminant), lb
Fx , g, r rolling resistance (drag forces developed on unbraked wheel
due to tire hysteresis and inertia effects), lb
instantaneous vertical force at wheel axle, lb
instantaneous vertical force acting on tire at ground, lb
3



=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
vertical component of hydrodynamic force due to runway con
taminant, lb
2
I moment of inertia of rotating wheel and tire parts, slug-ft
p unloaded tire inflation pressure, lb/sq in.
hydraulic-fluid pressure acting on wheel brake, lb/sq in.
back pressure in return line of brake system, lb/ sq in.
average gross footprint pressure, FZ,g/A , lb/sq in.
g
Pn average tire- ground bearing pressure, FZ,g/~' lb/sq in.
rated tire inflation pressure (one- fourth tire bursting pres
sure), lb/sq in.
unloaded tire radius, in.
slip ratio (dimensionless)
T net spin-up or spin- down torque acting on wheel, lb- in.
instantaneous retarding t orque developed on wheel by wheel
brake, lb-in.
t time, sec
carriage forward velocity, knots or ft/ sec as noted
tire hydroplaning velocity (occurs when Fz,g = Fz,L)' knots
or ft/sec as noted
w unloaded maximum tire width, in.
2
x horizontal axle acceleration, ft/sec
instantaneous movement of vertical-load center of pressure, in.
2
angular acceleration of wheel, radians/sec
vertical tire deflection, in.
4
J



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
.. ---- ------------
~~~~~~~~~~--- ~--
instantaneous tire-ground friction coefficient, F gkr
x, z, g
(dimensionless)
average value of 11 developed between slip ratios of 0.1
Ilav
and 0.5
maximum value of 11 developed between slip ratios of 0 and 1
value of 11 developed at slip ratio of 1
Ilskid
p mass density of runway contaminant, slugs/cu ft
wheel angular velocity, radians/sec
APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE
The present investigation was carried out by making test runs at
the Langley landing-loads track (track described in ref. 10). The main
carriage (fig. 1) of this facility weighs approximately 100,000 pounds
and travels at speeds up to 130 knots on steel rails which are located
on each side of a 2,200-foot-long concrete runway. The investigation
consisted of a series of braked and unbraked runs conducted at different
forward velocities with a type VII tire at inflation pressures ranging
from 85 to 350 pounds per square inch. The forward velocities varied
from approximately 13 to 104 knots. The vertical load per tire varied
from approximately 9,000 to 22,000 pounds. Runway surfaces investigated
were concrete, smooth asphalt (sand finish), and rough asphalt (aggregate
finish). Runway-surface contaminants investigated were water, slush,
Jp-4 jet-engine fuel, and fire-extinguishing foam (both detergent and
organic types). Both single and tandem wheel arrangements were inves
tigated.
TEST FIXTURE
The tire under test was mounted on a main-landing-gear wheel from
a century-series fighter airplane. This wheel was in turn mounted within
an instrumented test fixture (fig. 2) suspended from the vertical drop
carriage of the main carriage. Most of the tests were conducted with a
single wheel. Some tests were made with the tandem arrangement shown in
figure 3, where an unbraked wheel was added forward of the instrumented
wheel contained in the test fixture. The fixture could be positioned to
allow the tire to run 25 inches to either side of the track center line.
5
I
~



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
TIRES
The tires used in the investigation were 32X8.8, 22 ply rating,
type VII (extra high pressure ). Through the cooperation of several air
craft tire manufacturers, a number of tires with different tread designs
and tread materials were investigated. The tread designs for these tires,
along with their footprints for a vertical- loading condition of
Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds and p = 260 lb/ sq i n. , are shown in f i gure 4.
Tire cross sections shown in figure 5 illustrate the two di fferent tread
materi als investigated, rubber and fabric- reinforced rubber. Several of
the fabric- reinforced tires were provided with an extra thickness of rub
ber at the t i re surface so that during test, braki ng woul d occur only on
a rubber surface . A description of the t i res mentioned in this paper,
thei r code designati ons, and some infl ated tire dimensions are given in
table I. Tires having the code desi gnation S were made especi all y for
thi s i nvesti gation, and in all cases were mol ded to ful l tread depth but
with no tread pattern. Before testing, the desired tread patterns were
cut i nto the tire to a depth of approxi mately one- quarter of an inch by
means of an electrical ly heated knife .
WHEEL BRAKE
The wheel brake used in this investigati on was the main-landing- gear
di sk brake of a century- seri es jet fighter and consi sted of an assembly
of 5 rotor and 6 stator brake disks . The braki ng system f or most of the
braki ng runs was equipped with an "on- off" type of automati c braki ng
device that dumped brake pressure PB whenever t he wheel decel eration
2
dur ing braking exceeded 45 to 60 radians/ sec . A recovery si gnal was
generated, recocking the automatic braking device, when, after brake
release, the wheel angul ar vel oci ty became equal to the angul ar vel ocity
of an i nertia- type f l ywheel mounted i n the devi ce. Dur i ng the free- rol l
or unbraked taxii ng runs, the brake hydraul ic system was vented t o atmos
phere to mi ni mize brake torque . For most of the wheel-braki ng test runs,
the brake system, with antiskid unit operating, was set up to represent
a pil ot conti nuousl y ridi ng brakes during the l andi ng rol l . Thus, 20 to
30 braking cycles occurred for a test run at l ow forward veloci ty and
5 to 8 braki ng cycles for a run at hi gh forward velocity. A few wheel
braki ng runs were made without automatic braki ng. For these runs, the
brake was cycled once each run at specifi ed l ocati ons on the track run
way by means of a track- mounted knife edge whi ch actuated solenoid valves .
6
~~------



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
RUNWAY TROUGHS AND SURFACES
A cross section of the test runway surfaces is shown in figure 6.
The concrete dikes located along the edges of both the asphalt and con
crete runways formed troughs into which runway contaminants such as
water, slush, foam, and JP-4 jet-engine fuel could be deposited to the
desired depth. The concrete runway test surface shown at the right in
figure 6 is similar to actual portland-cement concrete surfaces in cur
rent use for airport runways. The asphalt runway shown at the left in
figure 6 was rolled in two adjoining sections (fig. 7). The initial
400-foot section had a smooth sand-finish surface, while the remaining
portion of the asphalt runway had a rough aggregate surface. Photographs
of the asphalt runway surfaces are shown in figure S. The sand particles
used for the smooth asphalt would pass through a l!lO-inch sieve. The
rough-asphalt aggregate conformed to a standard highway specification
wherein 100 percent of the aggregate could pass through a I-inch sieve,
95 to 100 percent through a 3/4-inch sieve, 60 to So percent through a
3!S-inch sieve, 40 to 60 percent through a 1/4-inch sieve, 20 to 40 per
cent through a 1/10-inch sieve, and 3 to 10 percent through aliSO-inch
sieve.
RUNWAY WETNESS
The elevation characteristics of the concrete runway within the
confines of the trough shown in figure 7 were such that with just the
high spots of the runway showing through the water surface, the water
depth in the trough varied between 0 and 0.3 inch. This degree of wet
ness corresponds to conditions measured on an actual runway during a
heavy rain shower. Figure 9 is a photograph of the concrete runway for
this condition of wetness.
The asphalt runway surfaces under similar wetness conditions (high
spots showing through water surface) showed a variation in water depth
of 0 to 0.5 inch. The larger variation in water depth for the asphalt
runway surface is felt to be the result of the method used in rolling
the asphalt during its installation on the track runway, and may be
representative of actual runway surfaces . Most of the wheel-braking
runs of this investigation were made with the wetness conditions just
described (concrete, dl = 0 to 0.3 inch; asphalt, dl = 0 to 0.5 inch).
For the unbraked rolling runs (performed on the concrete runway only),
the water depth varied from 0.25 to 1.75 inches.
7
----- -
- --~-



=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
OTHER RUNWAY CONTAMINANTS
Both braked and unbraked rolling runs were made on slush-covered
runways with slush depths ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 inches. A detailed
description of the slush, slush trough, and method of determining slush
density is given in reference 1.
One braked rolling run was performed on the asphalt runway after
the surface had been covered with Jp-4 jet-engine fuel. For this run,
a strip of the asphalt runway 1 to 2 feet wide and approximately 600 feet
long was coated as uniformly as possible with 12 gallons of Jp-4 fuel.
The fuel was allowed to stand on the runway for an hour, at which
~bout
time most of the puddles of fuel had disappeared either by evaporation
or penetration into the asphalt surface. The runway was then lightly
sprayed with water to simulate the beginning of a rain shower, and the
test run was made as soon as the entire surface was wetted.
One braked rolling run was performed on the concrete runway after
the surface had been covered with 2 to 5 inches of fire-extinguishing
foam such as might be used to cover airport runways during emergency
landing of airplanes. Two types of foam were used, organic (protein
base solution, Joint Army-Navy Specification JAN-C-266) and detergent
(Unox No.3 wetting-agent foam). Figure 10 shows the foam being applied
to the runway surface. The foam issuing from the nozzle in figure 10 is
of the organic type. The detergent foam was placed on the runway farther
down the track.
In addition to the purposely applied contaminants, the tires them
selves contaminated the runway surfaces by depositing abraded and molten
rubber on the runway surface during braked rolling. The abraded rubber
(deposited only at very low taxiing speeds) did not stick to the runway
surface and was readily removed. The molten rubber (deposited at the
higher taxiing speeds) solidified in the irregularly shaped voids of the
runway surface and was extremely difficult to remove. A stiff steel
brush was used to remove as much as possible of the molten rubber deposits
on the runway before the start of most of the wheel-braking runs.
INSTRUMENTATION
Instrumentation was provided to obtain the vertical and drag forces
developed between the single tire or rear tandem tire and the runway.
(See figs. 2 and 3.) Also obtained were the vertical and drag accelera
tions of the wheel axle; brake torque; wheel angular acceleration, veloc
ity, and displacement; forward velocity of the carriage; brake pressure;
vertical displacement of the test fixture (tire deflection); and time.
8



=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
~l
I
I
A 16-channel oscillograph was used to record the outputs of this instru
mentation during a test run. A more detailed discussion of the instru
I
mentation is given in reference 1. In addition, high-speed (200 frames
per second) 16-mm motion pictures were taken from three different posi
tions around the tire during each braked and unbraked rolling run.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
DEFINITION OF TERMS
A discussion of various parameters that affect the unbraked and
braked rolling of aircraft tires is included here as a basis for the
presentation of the data to follow. Consider the external forces and
moments acting on the rolling tire shown in figure 11. The net torques
or moments acting on the wheel must equal the acceleration of the wheel
(neglecting wheel-bearing frictional torque):
TB + Fz,gXc - Fx,g(ro - 5)
a. = (1)
I
For the notation used, positive a. denotes wheel spin-down and negative
a. denotes wheel spin-up. Some of the parameters involved in this equa
tion, as well as other tire parameters, will now be discussed.
Instantaneous Drag Force
An airplane tire during landing or take-off can be subjected to at
least three distinct types of drag loading. The first type of loading
is called rolling resistance Fx g and arises from wheel-bearing
, ,r
friction, tire hysteresis, and inertia effects. The second type of drag
loading Fx,g,f occurs only on fluid-covered runways and is created by
the aircraft tire displacing the fluid, for example slush or water, from
the wheel path on the runway. Finally, the drag force Fx,g,b is
created on a tire during changes in wheel rotational velocity and during
locked-wheel skidding. The magnitudes of Fx,g,f and Fx,g,b depend
upon the vertical load acting on the tire and the friction coefficients
developed between the tire and the ground. The instantaneous drag force
acting on the tire is the sum of these three types of drag force:
F =F +F +F b
x, g x, g, r x, g, f x, g,
9



=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
I
Vertical Ground
Forc~
The vertical ground force Fz,g is defined as the instantaneous
ground force acting on the tire. It should be noted that this vertical
ground force is practically never constant during take-off and landing
because of runway roughness and changes in the airplane attitude on the
runway.
Brake Torque
The brake torque TB is the wheel spin-down torque created by
mechanically braking a rolling aircraft tire through use of wheel brakes.
It is a resistive torque and its magnitude must equal the sum of the other
torques acting on the wheel at any instant during braking.
Deflected Tire Radius
The difference between the unloaded tire radius ro and the vertical
tire deflection 5 defines the length of the arm (ro - 5) through which
the drag force Fx,g acts in spinning up a tire.
Movement of Vertical-Load Center of Pressure
Because of tire elasticity, inertia, and hydrodynamic (wet runways
only) effects, the center of pressure of the vertical load on a rolling
tire will be displaced from its static position beneath the wheel-axle
center line. Positive values of Xc in equation (1) denote a shift of
the center of pressure in the direction of motion, negative values the
opposite.
Footprint Area
The tire contacts the ground in a "finite area whose shape is illus
trated in figure 4 for a number of tires. For tires with a tread pattern}
this area consists of alternate spaces where the tire contacts the ground
where it does not contact the ground. The total area, including the
~d
spaces that do not contact the ground, is designated as the gross foot
print area Ag of the tire. The actual ground-contact area, or bearing
An.
area, is referred to as the net footprint area
10
I
___ .. _ J
~~._.~.



=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
---- -- .----~ -- -- ~
Wheel Moment of Inertia
The wheel moment of inertia I is defined as the sum of the moments
of inertia of all masses rotating about the wheel axle. The rotating
masses in this investigation consisted of the wheel, tire, tube, and
brake rotors. The moment of inertia was determined experimentally with
tire Rl mounted on the wheel, and was found to be 2.73 slug- ft2. It is
assumed that the moment of inertia had the same magnitude when the other
t ires were mounted on the test wheel.
Slip Ratio
The difference between the peripheral velocity of the tire and the
horizontal velocity of the wheel axle is defined as the relative skidding
velocity occurring between the tire and the ground. The ratio of this
relative skidding velocity to the horizontal velocity of the axle is
defined as the slip ratio sl. Thus for a freely rolling wheel the slip
ratio is effectively zero while for a completely braked wheel (full ski d)
the slip ratio equals 1. When the rolling wheel is gaining angular veloc
ity (-a) - that is, rolling at decreasing slip ratio - the condition is
called spin-up. This condition occurs after touchdown at landing as well
as after brake release during wheel braking. A loss in angular velocity
(+a) - that is, rolling at increasing slip ratio - is called wheel spin
down and occurs, on dry runways, during wheel-brake application only.
Wheel spin- down and spin-up can also occur during high-speed unbraked
rolling of tires on fluid-covered runways as a result of hydrodynamic
effects.
Tire-Ground Friction Coefficient
The ratio of the instantaneous ground drag load Fx,g developed by
a rolling or nonrolling tire during straight- ahead (00 yaw) translation
on a runway surface and the instantaneous vertical ground load Fz,g
acting on the tire is arbitrarily defined as the tire-ground friction
Fx_
0-
coefficient For the special case of an unbraked rolling tire
~ =~.
Fz,g
undergoing straight- ahead translation on a dry runway, Fx,g = Fx,g,r
and the ratio F .IP is defined as the coefficient of rolling
x, g, r/- z, g
resistance . During wheel braking, if the braking torque TB is suf
ficiently large, the tire will be forced from a freely rolling condition
(sl = 0) to a full-skid condition (sl = 1) and the tire-ground friction
coefficient ~ will vary with slip ratio (for a dry runway) in the manner
11



=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
shown schematically in figure 12. The relationship between friction
coefficient I-l and slip ratio sl has considerable signific.ance with
regard to wheel braking. For example, to obtain maximum effectiveness,
automatic braking systems must be designed to operate near peak I-l
(I-lmax usually occurs at a slip ratio between 0.1 and 0.2). If opera-
tion occurs at a slip ratio greater than that required for peak friction,
tire tread life is reduced by skidding and braking effectiveness is
reduced. Operation at a slip ratio below that required for peak fric
tion simply results in reduced braking action.
Because of the transient nature of the tire- slip phenomenon, opera
tion by the pilot or antiskid unit at I-l i s not generally realized
max
without some overshooting or undershooting of the slip ratio for I-lmax'
For this reason, the average friction coefficient I-lav developed between
slip ratios of 0.1 and 0.5 (see fig. 12), rather than I-lmax' was arbitrar
ily chosen in this paper as more nearly representative of the friction
coefficient attainable with present- day braking systems . In most of the
comparisons made in this paper, I-lav is used. The friction coefficient
at full skid (sl = 1) is also of interest and is designated I-lskid'
MECHANICS OF THE ROLLING TIRE
For the condition of straight-ahead (unyawed) rolling on a runway
surface, equation (1) specifies the angular acceleration a wheel will
experience during both braked and free-rolling conditions .
Unbraked Rolling
Dry runways.- For the special case of unbraked rolling at constant
VH (constant m) on dry runway surfaces, both ~ and TB must equal
zero and equation (1) reduces to
Equation (2) thus specifies that the moment Fz,gXc must be equal
and opposite in direction to the wheel spin- up moment Fx , g , r(ro - 0)
created by the tire rolling resistance, which means that for positive
rolling resistance Xc must move forward of the axle center line in the
direction of motion for a rolling unbraked tire . One possible explana
tion of this phenomenon is based on the accelerations imparted to radial
12



=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
elements of the tire when entering and leaving the tire footprint region.
(See fig. 13(b).) If constant axle height above the runway (constant
vertical load) during the rolling process is assumed, radial elements of
the tire are accelerated toward the axle as they pass through the for
ward half of the tire footprint from ro at the leading edge of
r~gion,
the footprint to ro - 5 directly below the axle center line. As the
radial tire elements rotate out of the rear half of the footprint region
they are accelerated away from the axle by the internal tire pressure,
from ro - 5 beneath the axle to ro where exit from the footprint
occurs. These accelerations, and associated tire hysteresis effects,
create forces which are thought to change the vertical-load distribution
within the footprint from the symmetrical distribution of a standing tire
(fig. 13(a)) to a distribution such as that schematically indicated in
figure 13(b), with the resulting center of pressure of the vertical load
moved forward of the wheel-axle center line in the direction of horizontal
axle motion. Since the accelerations of the tire within the footprint
are a function of the tire rotational velocity (accelerations must increase
with increasing rotational velocity), it would appear logical for Xc to
move increasingly forward as the rotational velocity or forward speed is
increased. Such a trend is indicated by the data shown in figure 14(b).
According to Kamm (see ref. 11), this effect may result in loss of adhe
sion over the last third of the contact surface at high rolling speeds.
Wet runways.- Consider the case of a freely rolling unbraked tire
accelerating on a fluid-covered runway as in airplane take-off. As the
moving tire contacts and displa'ces the stationary runway fluid the
resulting change in momentum of the fluid creates hydrodynamic pressures
that react on the runway and tire surfaces. The tire engages the runway
fluid at a definite angle of attack that is determined by the intersec
tion of the tire equator and the ground plane. (See fig. 13(c).) As
the forward speed is increased, a wedge of water penetrates farther and
farther into the tire footprint region until at some high forward speed,
complete separation between the tire and runway occurs. This speed is
referred to as the tire hydroplaning velocity. At this speed, the tire
loses practically all of its directional stability because of the inability
of a fluid to develop large shear forces. Experimental measurements of
vertical-load center of pressure obtained from the present investigation
indicate that the hydrodynamic pressure generated at the front of the
tire footprint by the wedge of water distorts the vertical-load distribu
tion within the tire footprint region so that Xc moves farther forward
of the axle than for the case of a tire rolling at the same forward
velocity on a dry runway (shown schematically in fig. 13(c)). In addi
tion, the horizontal component of the hydrodynamic force adds to the
tire rolling resistance to produce a larger wheel spin-up moment.
13



=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
r
,I
As in the case of the braked tire (eq. (1))) the net torques and
moments acting on the unbraked tire must equal the acceleration of the
wheel. Including hydrodynamic effects) this can be expressed approxi
mately as
Fz)~C FZ)L)~
- [Fx)g)r + Fx)g)f + (Fz)g - (ro - 5)
I
When the vertical component of the hydrodynamic force F L equals
z
the vertical ground force Fz)g in equation (3)) the tire-grou ) nd fric-
tional spin-up moment vanishes and since the tire is entirely supported
by the runway fluid for this condition) tire hydroplaning then exists.
2
If F L is assumed to be proportional to V and directly propor-
z H
)
tional to tire-ground gross contact area Ag and fluid density p) and
if all other effects such as those due to tire tread design and fluid
viscosity are ignored) the following approximate expression for tire
hydroplaning velocity Vp may be obtained:
(4)
Rearranging terms gives
The term Fz)g/A is actually the gross footprint pressure Pg
g
exerted by the tire on the ground. From reference 12) this pressure may
be represented (for modern airplane tires) by
(6)
Thus the tire hydroplaning velocity may be approximately expressed for
modern aircraft tires by the equation
14
------- ---- -- -



=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
The data shown in figure 15 indicate that reasonable agreement between
calculated and experimental tire hydroplaning velocities occurs when
CL = 0.7 is used in equations (5) and (7). Equation (5)) rather than
equation (7)) was used to calculate Vp for the nonaircraft tires shown
in figure 15 because the effects of carcass stiffness on Pg for these
particular tires is not known.
Experimental data obtained from the present tests and reference 6
indicate that when tire hydroplaning velocity is approached or exceeded
by an unbraked rolling tire) tire spin-down or even tire stopping (m = 0)
can occur. Figure 16 shows data obtained on the buffed dimple tire D5Ml
when it entered a wet runway unbraked at a forward speed of 113 knots.
The predicted hydroplaning velocity (from eq. (7)) for the test tire pres
sure of 90 lb/sq in. was 85 knots. It will be noticed in this figure
that the tire started slowing down immediately upon entering the wet run
way and stopped rotating at approximately 102 knots) which is 17 knots
above the predicted hydroplaning velocity. These data support the con
clusion reached from the treadmill tests (ref. 5) that a hydroplaning
tire is stable about m = 0 for forward velocities in excess of the
hydroplaning velocity Vp and for moderate fluid depths. The data in
figure 16 also show that tire D5Ml did not spin up on the wet runway until
the forward velocity had decreased to 72 knots) a speed which is 13 knots
below the predicted hydroplaning velocity. This result indicates a
hysteresis effect which was noticed in the investigation of reference 5
but not reported. Because of this effect) the forward velocity required
for a tire to spin down and stop under increasing forward velocity con
ditions is always greater than the forward velocity required to spin up
the tire (after hydroplaning) under decreasing forward velocity conditions.
It is of interest to note that a similar test was performed at the
same forward velocity on the rib-tread tire R4 for a tire pressure of
85 lb/sq in. rather than the 90 lb/sq in. which was used for tire D5Ml.
Tire R4 never stopped rotating) but did suffer a 20-percent loss in
angular velocity while in the water trough) which was covered with water
to a depth of 0.1 to 0.4 inch. From equation (7)) the hydroplaning
velocity for rib-tread tire R4 should be slightly lower than that for
smooth-tread tire D5Ml because the inflation pressure for tire R4 was
5 lb/sq in. l ess; yet tire R4 showed less tire spin-down than tire D5Ml.
The tread depth of tire R4 at the time of the test was approximately
0.2 inch. The test results thus indicate a tread effect on tire hydro
planing even when the water depth is somewhat greater on the average
than the tread depth.
15



=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Braked Rolling
In order to develop drag forces for stopping aircraft on runways or
for directional control, a resistive torque opposing tire rotation is
applied to an aircraft wheel by means of wheel brakes. Rearranging equa
tion (1) gives an expression for this resistive torque TB in terms of
all the other torques or moments acting about the wheel axle at any instant.
A typical variation of TB with time is shown in figure 17 for tire R2
undergoing braked rolling on a wet runway at high forward speed (VH = 96
to 93.5 knots). Also shown in this figure are time histories of
ill, 0"
PE, ~,and the net spin-up moment Fx,g(ro - 0) - Fz,~c under these
test conditions.
The mechanics involved in braking a rolling tire can be treated best
by discussing figure 17 in detail. Just before time zero in this figure,
the tire is unbraked and rolling at a velocity of 130 radians/sec. At
time zero, a valve is opened to allow hydraulic fluid to flow from an
accumulator through a micrometer needle valve and into the brake, where
the pressure PE builds up to the accumulator pressure. This pressure
acts on pistons positioned around the wheel which force brake stators
(splined to the wheel axle) against brake rotors (rotating with the wheel).
The stator and rotor rubbing surfaces (brake pucks) generate a resistive
torque TB which opposes tire rotation. The torque TB is a function
PB
of the pressure supplied to the brake, the friction coefficient
developed between the rubbing surfaces, and the distance between the axle
and brake-puck center lines. It will be noticed in figure 17 that the
initial rise of after time zero does not create a corresponding rise
~
in TB until PB exceeds approximately 100 Ib/sq in. This lag is
explained by the fact that the brake pistons must first overcome return
spring forces before the stators will start sliding along the axle toward
the rotors. The small constant value of TB before stator motion starts
is believed to be due to light contact between the stators and rotors
while unloaded.
As PB increases further, there is a corresponding rise in the
curves for both TB and Fx,g(ro - 0) - Fz,~c until the slip ratio
for is exceeded. At this point the wheel decelerates rapidly as
~max
a result of the net torque impulse (area between curves for TB and
Fx,g(ro - 0) - Fz,~c)' The change in momentum imparted to the wheel by
the brakes must exactly equal this net torque impulse. This comparison
is shown in figure 17 for both spin-down and spin-up conditions. The
agreement shown is typical for the instrumentation used in this
investigation.
16
---------



=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Continuing along the time history of the braking cycle in figure 17)
a point is reached where the wheel comes to a complete stop. At this
point a and Fx)g)r equal zero and TB equals
(Fx)g)f + FZ)~Skid)(rO - 5) - Fz)gXc' The symbol ~skid is the fric
1)
tion coefficient for the tire under full- skid (sl = conditions) and
is considerably lower than ~max for the wet-runway test conditions of
figure 17. At time 0.63 second in figure 11) the brakes are released by
dumping the pressure PB' Almost immediately) the net spin-up moment
increases above TB and the resulting net torque impulse spins up the
wheel to the angular velocity required for free rolling. It is inter
esting to note that considerable TB exists after PB has been reduced
to near zero values. This effect is attributed to grabbing of the brakes
PB)
(stators and rotors do not disengage at zero due to dynamic condi-
tions in the brake. The residual TB after release of PB was a var-
iable in the current tests. Some runs developed larger residual TB
values than others without establishing any identifiable pattern. This
residual torque can seriously affect wheel spin-up characteristics when
tire treads with low friction coefficients are used at high forward speeds
on wet runways) as is shown in figure 18.
AUTOMATIC BRAKING DEVICES
This section of the paper will discuss how the deterioration of wheel
angular acceleration with increasing forward velocity on wet runways
impairs the performance of the antiskid unit used in this investigation.
The operation of many antiskid units in use on aircraft at the pres
ent time is based on changes in wheel angular acceleration. The antiskid
unit used in the present investigation is such a device. Depressing the
pilot's brake pedal releases pressure from an accumulator to the wheel
brake. This hydraulic pressure forces the brake stators against the brake
rotors (for a disk brake)) creating an increasing resistive torque TB
that opposes wheel rotation in the direction of motion. A point will
soon be reached where the slip ratio required for maximum tire-ground
friction coefficient will be exceeded and the tire will suddenly decel
erate. The test antiskid unit was set to dump brake pressure (by means
of a solenoid-operated valve) when this angular deceleration exceeded
45 to 60 radians/sec 2 . In the test antiskid unit) an inertia-type fly
wheel disengages from the main wheel when the main wheel starts to decel
erate. This inertia flywheel then coasts, continuously losing its angular
velocity because of bearing frictional torque and possibly clutch drag.
17



=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
After brake-pressure release, the resistive torque TB decays to
zero and the drag-load spin-up moment accelerates the main wheel back up
to runway speed. When the angular velocity of the wheel equals the rota
tional velocity of the antiskid inertia flywheel, which has now slowed
below its value at brake release, a signal is generated to close the
pressure dump valve and open a valve located between the accumulator and
the brake, allowing pressure to be applied to the brake again, and another
braking cycle commences.
For dry runways, spin-up accelerations are large enough so that the
inertia flywheel loses little velocity during the recovery portion of the
braking cycle, and successive braking cycles always start with the tire
rotating at or near the tangential velocity required for the airplane's
forward speed along the runway (sl = 0). Such is not the case under
certain braking conditions on wet runways, as is shown in figures 19
to 21. These figures show sample oscillograph tracings obtained during
wet-runway braking tests at different forward speeds with several tires
having different tread patterns. Figure 19 shows tracings obtained for
the rib-tread tire S2M2 at low and high forward speeds. This figure
illustrates satisfactory antiskid operation on a wet runway, with the
tire recovering the necessary tangential velocity before each new braking
cycle.
Figure 20 shows sample oscillograph tracings obtained during wet
runway braking tests at approximately the same test forward velocities
for a less skid-resistant tire, smooth all-rubber-tread tire Sl. Notice
that the developed drag loads and spin-up accelerations in figure 20 are
much less than those shown in figure 19 for the rib-tread tire S2M2.
Figure 20(b) illustrates a characteristic of the test antiskid unit in
that reapplication of brake pressure initiates another braking cycle
before complete wheel spin-up has been attained.
The end result of this antiskid characteristic is illustrated in fig
ure 21, where tracings of oscillograph records obtained during wet-runway
tests at high forward speeds are shown for tire Dl at p = 260 Ib/sq in.
and tire Sl at p = 120 Ib/sq in. The initial braking cycle for tire Dl
(fig. 21(a)) started on dry concrete. Note that for both tires Dl and Sl,
the initial angular velocity of the wheel was never completely regained
before the next braking cycle commenced, resulting in completely locked
wheels (wheels at full skid) at the end of 3 or 4 braking cycles.
The test antiskid unit had a lockout feature for low-speed taxiing
(below 4 or 5 mph) so that the pilot could arbitrarily brake each wheel
up to full skid without operation of the antiskid unit. This feature
is illustrated in figure 2l(b), where after the last braking cycle the
_J
18



=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
brake pressure PB is seen to be increasing rapidly. (Brake pressure
PB went to full system pressure in subsequent portions of the oscillo
graph records of fig. 21.) Inadvertent operation of the antiskid lock
out feature also occurred during the first wet braking run with a new
and unused test tire (tracings not shown). Conditions for this test
were: Fz,g = 10,000 pounds, P = 260 lb/sq in., and VH = 100 knots.
The wheel developed a full-skid condition on the wet concrete in a man
ner similar to that shown in figure 21 and then skidded onto a portion
of the concrete runway that was dry. The tire failed (see fig. 22) after
sliding (locked wheel) approximately 60 feet on the drY runway surface.
It is obvious that the combination of this antiskid lockout feature and
a pilot continuously riding the brakes can be hazardous to airplane opera
tion on runways which are intermittently wet and dry.
In summary, it is apparent that the relatively long spin-up times,
due to low spin-up accelerations, developed by some tires during braking
at high speeds on wet runways can seriously impair the performance of
antiskid units that utilize an inertia flywheel for reference angular
velocity. The antiskid-unit lockout feature used in some airplane braking
systems to permit differential braking by the pilot at low taxiing speeds
with antiskid on, can lead to tire failure under certain braking condi
tions on wet runways at high forward speeds.
Examination of equation (1) shows that highest wheel spin-up accel
eration on wet runways will result when (a) the forward shift of Xc is
a minimum, (b) the drag moment Fx,g(r - 5) is as large as possible,
o
and (c) the brake torque TB drops to zero immediately after brake
pressure release. The test results indicate that for wet conditions
(a) and (b) are functions of tire tread and runway design while (c) is
a function of the braking system (hydraulic resistance and brake grab).
DISCUSSION OF PARAMETERS
ROLLING RESISTANCE
The variation of the steady-state unbraked-rolling resistance
force Fx,g,r with forward velocity is shown in figure 14(a) in terms
of the ratio Fx,g/Fz,g. The data shown in this figure were obtained
from the unbraked-rolling tests under essentially constant conditions
of vertical ground load Fz,g and tire pressure p on a dry concrete
runway. The scatter of the test data in this figure is such that no
19



=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
discernible tendency of the rolling resistance to increase with decreasing
tire pressure (at constant vertical load) is evident. Such a trend would
be expected from tire hysteresis and inertia considerations because of
the larger deformations of the carcass experienced by tires rolling at
reduced tire pressures. The tendency of rolling resistance to increase
with increasing forward velocity shown in figure 14(a) is in agreement
with the findings of reference 11. The rolling- resistance values obtained
from the present tests are, however, somewhat higher than those reported
in reference 11 for airplane tires on hard surfaces. It is fel t that
brake grab (discussed in an earlier section of this paper) is mainly
responsible for this disagreement in that drag forces produced by the
unloaded wheel-brake rubbing surfaces add to the actual rolling-resistance
values to produce larger effective rolling resistance values for the tire
being tested. The possibility that modern aircraft tires, such as those
used in the present tests, might develop larger rolling-resistance val ues
than the older and smaller aircraft tires discussed in reference 11
should, however, not be entirely ruled out as a factor contributing to
this difference.
FLUID-DISPLACEMENT DRAG
Single or Leading Tandem Wheels
When an unbraked rolling tire encounters a fluid of finite depth on
a runway surface, the drag force acting on the rolling tire will increase
in the manner shown in figures 16 and 23. In reference 1, where the ini
tial results obtained from the unbraked-rolling portion of this investi
gation were used, it was determined for the velocity range covered that
this increase in tire rolling resistance due to fluid displacement drag
Fx , g , f could be represented with reasonable accuracy by the equation
(8)
In words, equation (8) states that F for a single wheel or a
x,g,f
front-mounted tandem wheel varies approximately linearly with fluid den
sity, fluid depth, tire cross-sectional width at the fluid surface on
the runway, and forward velocity squared. The comparison of the predic
tions of equation (8) and experimental data from unbraked-rolling runs
on a water-covered concrete runway made later in the test program (not
included in ref. 1) is shown in figure 24. The scatter of the data in
figure 24 is attributed mainly to wind effects, which produced water
depth gradients in the water trough when the wind was blowing during
20
- -- --- - - ----



=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
test runs, and to the elevation characteristics of the concrete runway,
which produced water-depth variations of as much as 0.3 inch in the test
trough. (See section entitled "Runway Troughs and Surfaces.")
Rear Tandem Wheels
It was observed in reference 1 that when a single wheel passed
through the slush trough, most of the slush in the wheel path was com
pletely removed or thrown from the slush trough. Reference 1 also states
that the slush residue remaining in the trough in the path of the wheel
did not exceed 0.1 inch. This observation on the path-clearing effective
ness of the front wheel is confirmed by the data shown in figure 25. The
solid curve in this figure is the slush-displacement drag acting on a
single wheel for the slush conditions noted, calculated from equation (8),
while the single data point shows the slush-displacement drag developed
on a rear tandem wheel at the same forward velocity (approximately
92 knots) for the same runway slush conditions. With a slush depth of
1.75 inches on the runway, the drag force developed on the rear wheel
of the tandem gear was the same as a single wheel would experience in
approximately 0.1 to 0.2 inch of slush. These data indicate that for
the test conditions noted, the fluid-displacement drag developed on rear
tandem wheels is only 0.1 the magnitude of the drag force developed on
a single wheel or front-mounted tandem wheel.
BRAKING DRAG
When relative motion exists between the tire footprint (the part
of the tire in contact with a runway surface) and the runway surface, a
drag force Fx,g,b is created which is equal to the product of the ver
tical load acting on the tire and the friction coefficient developed
~
between the tire and runway surfaces. (See section entitled "Definition
of Terms.") No further treatment of Fx , g , b will be given in this paper
since a knowledge of the variation of and the vertical load automat
~
ically defines the variation of Fx , g , b. The coefficient is discussed
~
in detail in a subsequent section.
MOVEMENT OF VERTIC AIr-LOAD CENTER OF PRESSURE
The ground-pressure distribution within the footprint of a tire
undergoing translation along the ground can be distorted by different
ground-load conditions so that the vertical-load center of pressure of
21



=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
the tire may shift either ahead of or behind the wheel-axle center line.
Tire fore-and-aft elastic effects displace the tire footprint in the
direction of the applied ground-drag loads and cause Xc to move toward
the rear of the footprint. Tire hysteresis and inertia, and runway
hydrodynamic effects, distort the pressure distribution within the foot
print in such a way that Xc must move toward the front.
For the condition of unbraked rolling on a dry runway, tire elastic
effects are small and tire hysteresis and inertia effects predominate,
so that Xc is always a small distance forward of the axle center line.
Figure 14(b) illustrates this condition and also shows that Xc tends
to move farther forward as the rolling velocity or forward velocity is
increased. For the condition of unbraked rolling on fluid-covered run
ways, the hydrodynamic effects predominate, expecially at the higher for
ward speeds and greater fluid depths, and Xc moves farther forward of
the axle center line than for the equivalent dry-runway conditions.
These effects are shown in figures 16, 23, and 26. It is interesting
to note in figure 16 that just before the unbraked hydroplaning tire
encounters the greater water depth on the runway and after tire spin
down to a stop, Xc decreases in magnitude. Apparently the decrease
in Xc at this point is caused by tire hysteresis and inertia effects
dropping to zero when the tire stops rotating.
On a dry runway during wheel braking, tire elastic effects predom
inate and Xc moves toward the rear of the tire footprint at the larger
values of ground-drag load during both wheel spin-down and spin-up, as
is shown in figure 27 for tire R2. During wheel braking on wet runways,
hydrodynamic effects become increasingly larger as the forward velocity
is increased and tend to reduce or eliminate the rearward movement of
Xc shown for dry runways. This trend was evident for all tires inves
tigated but especially for the less skid-resistant tread designs; for
example, see figure 28 for the smooth-tread tire Sl.
WHEEL SPIN-UP AND SPIN-OOWN
Satisfactory operation of most antiskid devices in use on airplanes
today is dependent upon quick recovery of wheel rotational velocity by
the braked wheel upon release of the wheel brakes. (See section entitled
IIAutomatic Braking Devices. II) Test results indicate that the degree of
runway wetness, tire-tread design, tire inflation pressure, and the loca
tion of the tire (in tandem-wheel landing-gear arrangements) can influence
wheel spin-down and spin-up characteristics markedly.
The test data indicate that for braking on dry runway surfaces,
tread design has little effect on wheel spin-up characteristics. For
I
22
i
-~



=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
example, compare the solid curves in figure 29 for the rib-tread tire Rl
and the dimple-tread tire Dl. All of the tire-tread designs investigated
show a degradation in wheel spin-up performance during braking on wet
runways, especially at the higher forward velocities of the investigation.
For the velocity range covered, multirib-tread tires such as tires Rl
and S2M2 showed considerably less decrease in spin-up performance than
did the other tire tread types. For example, compare the dashed curves
in figure 29 for the multirib-tread tires Rl and S2M2 with the dashed
curves obtained for tires Dl and S3.
The test data also indicate that wheel spin-up performance on wet
runways will be further impaired for the less skid-resistant tires by
reducing the tire inflation pressure while keeping the vertical load on
the tire constant (see fig. 30), which increases the length of the con
tact region between the tire and the ground. The multirib-tread tire S2M2
under the same test conditions (see fig. 30) showed little loss in spin
up performance.
Wheel spin-up performance on wet runways for the less skid-resistant
tires may be improved by mounting these tires on the rear wheels of tan
dem landing gears, thus utilizing the path-clearing ability of the front
or leading tandem wheel. (See discussion of fluid-displacement drag
Fx,g,f.) The curves in figure 31 indicate that no large improvement in
wheel spin-up performance is experienced by the more skid-resistant tires
(represented in fig. 31 by tire S2M2) when they are mounted on the rear
wheel of a tandem landing gear.
INSTANTANEOUS TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT
Time histories illustrating the variation of the instantaneous
tire-ground friction coefficient developed during braking test runs
~
on wet concrete runways for a tire with good skid resistance (tire R2)
and a tire with poor skid resistance (tire Dl) are shown in figures 17
and 18, respectively. The variation of ~ with slip ratio is shown in
the appendix for most of the skid cycles obtained during braking tests
of a single wheel on wet concrete runways for the different tires
investigated.
MAXIMUM TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT
Dry Runways
For dry concrete runways, the curves of as a function of slip
~
ratio for the different tires investigated usually displayed a very
23



=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
prominant peak ~max between slip ratios of O.l and 0.2 (see appendix).
The data shown in figure 32 indicate that is practically inde
~ax
pendent of forward velocity, with most of the tire tread designs indi
cating little or no decrease in the magnitude of over the for-
~max
ward velocity range investigated.
The magnitude of is, however, dependent upon the average
~max
tire-ground bearing pressure Pn' as shown in figure 33, where
~max
decreases in magnitude with increasing values of Pn. This is the trend
reported in reference 12 for values obtained at very low forward
~max
speeds (0.009 < VH < 2 knots). It is interesting to note that the equa
tion = 0.93 - O.OOllPn' which was empirically derived on the basis
~ax
of low-speed data (ref. 12), also fits the high-speed data of this inves
tigation with fair accuracy. This agreement also supports the conclu
sion that is relatively independent of forward speed for a dry
~
concrete runway surface.
Contaminated Runways
The data from this investigation and other available experimental
data (refs. 4 to 9) indicate that ~ax decreases with increasing for
ward velocity on fluid-covered or contaminated runways. The test data
indicate that follows the trends observed for but at some-
~max ~av
what higher values of
~.
FULL-SKID TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT
Dry Runways
The variations of with forward velocity on a dry concrete
~skid
runway for several of the tire designs investigated are shown in fig
ure 32. It is seen that ~skid decreases as the forward velocity
increases for the velocity range investigated. This trend is more
clearly shown in figure 34, where the ratio ~skid/~max is plotted
against forward velocity for a number of tires used in this and other
investigations. The data in £igure 34 indicate very small differences
between and at low forward velocities and very large
~skid ~max
2)
differences (~:d ~ 0. 3 at the higher forward velocities. The sub
stantial difference in tire behavior at low and high forward velocities
24



=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
- ----1
is attributed to tire heating effects. For example, at the low veloc
ities of references 13 to 15, the rubber deposited on the runway by
the sliding tires consisted of small solid particles that were evidently
sheared or abraded from the tire surface by the asperities of the run
way surface. At the conclusion of each of these low-speed runs, the
rubber tread in the ground-contact region was warm to the touch but
showed no evidence of being subjected to high heat. In contrast, in
the present investigation, inspection of the skid marks after high-speed
skids on a dry concrete runway revealed that the rubber apparently was
deposited in the liquid state since the concrete gave the appear
surfa~e
ance of having been painted with rubber. At the conclusion of each high
speed braking run, the rubber or rubber-fabric tread of the ground
contact region of the tire was hot and sticky to the touch. In fact,
when the brake was released after a high-speed skid, this sticky contact
area of the tire would stamp the runway at each succeeding revolution
of the wheel and leave a clear imprint on the runway surface. As a
point of interest, these stampings looked exactly like the tire foot
prints shown in figure 4.
Correlation of the movie films taken on each braking run with the
corresponding oscillograph records showed that the puff of smoke
(oxidized rubber) emanating from the tire footprint region during a
braking cycle at high speed occurred at slip ratios ranging from 1.0
(full skid) to as low as 0.15. The reduced values of ~skid/~max
obtained on tires at the higher forward velocities are probably caused
by the molten rubber in the tire footprint region acting as a lubricant
between the tire and the ground. Prolonged skids of a tire at or near
can cause rapid erosion of the tire tread and carcass and result
~skid
in failure of the tire. Figure 22 is a photograph of a tire that failed
after a full skid of only 60 feet on a dry concrete runway. No tests
were conducted on dry asphalt runways during this investigation.
Water-Covered Runways
Figure 35 shows the variation of ~skid with forward velocity for
several different rib-tread aircraft tires on water-covered concrete
and asphalt runway surfaces. For comparison purposes, this figure
includes British flight-test data (refS. 8 and 9) that were obtained
under similar runway wetness conditions. Both British flight tests
and NASA track tests indicate that ~skid decreases with increasing
forward velocity for wet concrete and asphalt runways, although the
British values of ~skid are generally lower than the track values
over the velocity range investigated. Both British and NASA track
data indicate that the wet asphalt-runway surfaces investigated gave
higher ~skid values than did the wet concrete surfaces at the higher
forward velocities.
25



=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
AVERAGE TIRE-GROUND FRICTION COEFFICIENT
Dry Runways
In figure 12) is defined as the average value of the tire
~av
ground friction coefficient obtained between slip ratios of 0.1
~
and 0.5. For tires on a dry concrete runway) the data shown in fig
ure 36 indicate that ~av is approximately 10 percent lower in magni
tude than over the forward-velocity range investigated. Fig
~max
ure 36 also indicates that ~av (as was found earlier for ~max)
appears to be independent of forward velocity over the range of condi
tions investigated) on a dry concrete runway.
Contaminated Runways
In contrast to the dry-runway results) which showed little or no
forward-velocity effect on the experimental data obtained during
~av)
braking runs on contaminated runway surfaces disclosed that
~av
decreases markedly with increasing forward velocity. The magnitude of
the decrease in was found to depend upon such parameters as:
~av
Runway composition and surface
Type and depth of contaminant on runway
Vertical ground load acting on tire
Tire inflation pressure
Tire position in tandem wheel arrangements
Tire tread material
Tire tread pattern
It is the purpose of this section to show how these parameters affect
the magnitude of developed on contaminated runway surfaces.
~av
Runway composition and surface.- The effect on ~av of braking a
single wheel on water-covered runways of different composition and sur
face texture is shown in figure 37. These data indicate that the values
of ~av developed on asphalt surfaces with both the smooth sand finish
26



=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
and the rough aggregate finish were higher than those developed on the
concrete surface for the low and medium forward velocities investigated.
At the higher forward velocities, ~av values developed on the test
runway surfaces were approximately e~ual. Figure 37 also shows that the
surface texture of the asphalt runways investigated apparently had little
effect on ~av' since both the smooth and rough asphalt surfaces gave
rise to approximately the same values of ~av for the range of condi
tions investigated.
38
Type and depth of contaminant on runway.- Figure shows faired
~av data obtained during single-wheel braking runs on both slush-
covered and water-covered runways for tires D2 and 82M2. By comparing
curves A (water) and curves B (slush) of this figure, it may be seen
that curves B increase at the higher forward velocities whereas curves A
continue to decrease . This rising trend of the slush data at the higher
velocities is believed to be due to the depth of slush on the runways
during the tests. The fluid-displacement drag forces due to slush for
the test conditions were calculated by means of equation (8), and these
calculations in terms of an effective ~av are shown as curves C of
38.
figure The same calculations were made for the water-covered run
way at a forward speed of 100 knots, and an effective ~av e~ual to
approximately 0.014 was obtained. This low value is due to the small
average water depth (d = 0.15 inch) used in the tests. The differences
l
38,
between curves B and C are curves D of figure the contribution to
of tire braking friction and tire rolling resistance. Curves D
~av
decrease with forward velocity in a manner similar to data for the
water-covered runway (curves A), which contain a negligible amount of
water-displacement drag as just indicated. Comparison of curves A
and D indicates that lower values of ~av are generated during braking
on slush-covered runway surfaces than on water-covered surfaces.
Test results indicate that the presence of measurable fluid depths
on a runway surface are not a necessary requirement for low braking
friction on contaminated runways. Values of that are considerably
~av
reduced from dry-runway values can also be obtained during braking runs
on runways that are only damp, that is, moistened with just enough water
or other fluids to create a film on the runway surface, but not suf
ficient to form puddles. This effect is shown in figure 39 for tire 81M3
on a concrete runway and for tire 82M2 on an asphalt runway. The data
in figure 39 indicate that values developed on both the damp
~av
(with water) asphalt and concrete runways are only slightly higher than
the values obtained for the water-covered (d = 0 to 0.3 inch) runways.
l
The data shown in figure 39(b) for an asphalt runway contaminated with
Jp-4 fuel and water indicate that this form of runway contamination
27



=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
results in an even greater decrease of than was obtained for the
~av
asphalt runway dampened with water only. No tests were made with the
concrete runway contaminated with Jp-4 fuel.
The data obtained during braked rolling on a concrete runway
covered with two types of fire-extinguishing foam (organic and deter
gent) are shown in figure 40. For the velocity range investigated these
data indicate that values developed on the foam-covered runway
~av
were approximately equal to those developed on a water-covered concrete
runway. The large depths of foam indicated for this particular braking
run can be discounted, since both types of foam were of very low density
and foam-displacement drag forces would be negligible.
The results of the braking runs on runways damp with water, damp
with Jp-4 fuel and water, slush-covered, and foam-covered tend to indi
cate that the reduction of developed on these surfaces may depend
~av
less on depth and density and more on lubrication or other properties
of the particular contaminant, especially at subhydroplaning velocities.
Most airport runway surfaces are contaminated to some extent by
from aircraft tires that is deposited on the runway surface during
~bber
wheel spin-up at initial airplane touchdown, and during wheel braking
in the landing roll. The data shown in figure 41 indicate that the tire
ground friction coefficient is reduced from the values for uncontaminated
dry runweys when wheel braking occurs on a rubber-contaminated surface.
These data indicate that ~av decreases from about 0.64 for the dry
uncontaminated concrete surface to about 0.48 for the dry rubber
contaminated concrete surface under the conditions of the investigation.
Vertical ground load acting on tire.- Increasing the vertical
ground load on tire 82M2 (fig. 4(n)) while keeping the tire inflation
pressure constant during single-wheel braking tests on a wet runway
affects ~av as shown in figure 42. The data in figure 42 indicate
that for this particular tread design, an increase in the tire vertical
load from 10,000 pounds to 22,000 pounds decreases the magnitude of
~av
throughout the forward-velocity range investigated. Apparently this
result is a tread effect rather than a load effect, since for this par-
ticular tire the higher load condition results in a larger footprint
~
area and consequently a larger region near the outside of the footprint
I
without grooves to furnish escape paths for the water trapped between
the footprint and the ground.
It is interesting to note that while an increase in the vertical
load at constant tire pressure reduces this load condition also
~av'
increases the average wheel spin-up acceleration acting on tire 82M2
28



=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
after brake release, as is shown in figure 42(b). This result points
out the fact that it is the product of Fz,g and ~, rather than ~
alone, that determines the wheel spin-up acceleration. For this reason,
better wheel spin-up acceleration will probably result if wing lift is
dumped as quickly as possible after touchdown during landing, so that
the full weight of the airplane will act on the tires.
Tire inflation pressure.- Decreasing the tire inflation pressure
while keeping the vertical ground load on a tire constant affects the
tire-ground contact region in two ways. First, the tire footprint length
and width is increased, and second, the tire-ground bearing pressure is
reduced. The data shown in figure 43 indicate that lowering the tire
pressure from 260 to 120 Ib/sq in. at Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds produces
little change in for tires 81, 82, and 82M2 on a wet concrete run
~av
way. These data do, however, show some tendency for the low-pressure
values to be higher at low forward speeds than the high-pressure
~av
values. The reverse is true at the higher forward speeds. These
~av
trends are best illustrated in figure 43(a) for data obtained for
tire 82M2 on the wet asphalt runway. The same trends are shown in fig
ure 43(b) where average spin-up acceleration is plotted against forward
speed for the same tires and test conditions (on the concrete runway)
as those of figure 43(a). For the condition of constant vertical load,
average wheel spin-up acceleration reflects the magnitude of the tire
ground friction coefficient that is developed during wheel spin-up.
Tire position in tandem wheel arrangements.- As pointed out in
reference 1, the forward or leading wheel of a tandem-wheel landing
gear arrangement tends to clear the path for the rear wheel of the tan
dem gear during unbraked rolling on a fluid-covered runway. This obser
vation was confirmed by the data shown in figure 25. The data shown in
figure 44(a) indicate that this path-clearing ability of the forward
wheel can also raise the level of developed during braking on wet
~av
runways by tires with poor skid resistance when these tires are used on
rear tandem wheels. These data also indicate that for the conditions
investigated, position of the tire in a tandem gear had little or no
effect on values developed by the skid-resistant rib-tread
~av
tire 82M2. The same trend is indicated in figure 44(b), where the aver
age wheel spin-up accelerations developed under the test conditions of
figure 44(a) are plotted against forward velocity. The path-clearing
effect of the leading wheel in a tandem arrangement is even more pro
nounced when braking occurs on slush-covered runways, as illustrated in
figure 44( c).
Tire tread material.- Until the advent of jet aircraft, tire
designers used rubber alone as tread material with very satisfactory
29



=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
results. The much higher landing and take-off velocities required of
most jet aircraft as compared with propeller-type aircraft, however,
compelled designers to reinforce the rubber tread by means of fabric
laminations in order to meet the new high-speed design requirements con
cerning tread wear and tread integrity. Typical all-rubber and fabric
reinforced tire-tread sections are shown in figure 5. The data in fig
ure 45 indicate that the effect of tread material on the magnitude of
~av is largely insignificant over most of the forward-velocity range
investigated. At the higher forward velocities, however, the fabric
reinforced treads tend to develop slightly higher valu€s on wet
~av
concrete runways than do all-rubber treads. In fact, the buffed dimple
tire D5Ml (fig. 4(d)), which had all of the tread removed so that the
carcass cords were exposed, developed the highest values at the
~av
higher forward velocities of all the tires investigated for this effect.
In summary, reinforcing rubber tire treads by means of fabric lamina
tions in the tread does not impair the braking effectiveness of tires
on wet concrete runways.
Tire tread pattern.- The variations in average tire-ground friction
coefficient with forward velocity obtained for the 20 different
~av
tread patterns (see fig. 4) investigated during single-wheel braking
tests on a wet concrete runway are shown in figure 46. The ~av values
shown in this figure were determined from wheel spin-down data given
in the appendix. The tread-pattern comparisons to follow make use of
the faired lines drawn through the data of figure 46.
Smooth and dimple treads: Tires with smooth and dimple treads
developed the lowest values of all the different tires investigated
~av
on wet runway surfaces. The variations of ~av with forward velocity
for these tire treads were similar in shape and magnitude, as is shown
in figure 47. For the conditions investigated, the smooth and dimple
tread tires developed values of ~av ranging from 0.14 to 0.175 at
50 knots and 0.060 to 0.085 at 100 knots forward velocity.
The path of the braked wheel through the water-covered runway was
examined after each braking run. This examination revealed that at the
higher forward velocities, the smooth- and dimple-tread tires investi
gated did not deposit rubber on the wet concrete surface as did the rib
tires Rl and S2M2. The only visual evidence on the runway that
~read
the smooth- and dimple-tread tires had been subjected to braking action
was that the path of the tire was much cleaner and whiter than the sur
rounding concrete surface. The inference follows that most of the foot i
I
print was supported by a water film at the higher velocities, or else
I
penetration to the concrete surface would have occurred and rubber would
have been deposited on the runway surface.
I
I
I
30
I
_____ J
----- ----



=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
----- -----
-~
Circumferential rib treads: Tire designers have known for many
years that cutting grooved patterns into tire treads can substantially
increase the braking coefficients of tires on wet surfaces. This effect
is shown in figure 48, where ~av values obtained for the smooth-tread
tires 81 and 82 are compared with values obtained for the identical
tires after circumferenti al grooves were cut into the treads. Also shown
in figure 48 are the comparisons between ~av values obtained for the
dimple-tread tire D2 and values obtained for the similar dimple-tread
tires D6Ml and DBMI which were modified before the test by cutting five
and two circumferential grooves, respectively, into the tread. In every
case shown in figure 48, cutting circumferential grooves into the smooth
and dimple tire treads resulted in large increases in braking friction,
especially at the higher test velocities. The curves in this figure also
indicate that increasing the number of grooves cut into a tread increases
the braking friction for the tires shown. In fact, tire Rl (see
figs. 4(s) and 46(w)), which has nine circumferential grooves, developed
the highest values of at most forward speeds of all the tires
~av
investigated. It should be noted, however, that other design considera
tions, such as tread wear, tread integrity, and reinforcing of the tread
for high-speed operation, act to limit the number of grooves that can be
incorporated in a tread. As an example, this same tire Rl which produces
such good braking friction on wet runways is not qualified for use on
high-speed aircraft because of the excessive tread wear and tread chunking
that occurs for this tire during high-speed operation.
The test data also indicate that the width of the circumferential
groove cut into a tire tread is of utmost importance with regard to
developing high braking coefficients on wet runways. For example,
increasing the width of the single groove from 1/2 inch for tire 81Ml
(fig. 4(j)) to 3/4 inch for tire 81M2 (fig. 4(k) ) tended to decrease
~av' as is shown in f igure 46(k). Removing the zigzag rib between the
grooves of tire DBMl (fig. 4(g)), thus increasing greatly the width of
the groove for tire DBM2 (fig. 4(h)), resulted in lower ~av values
for tire DBM2 over the forward-velocity range shown in figure 46(h).
On the other hand, the addition of a narrow groove to tire 82Ml
(fig. 4(m)) resulted in higher values of ~av for tire 82M2 (fig. 4(n))
than for tire 82Ml, as is shown in figure 48(b}.
As previously mentioned, close scrutiny of the wet concrete runway
surface after braking runs in which circumferential-groove-tread tires
were used disclosed that these tire treads deposited rubber on the con
crete surface during braking cycles at the higher forward velocities,
whereas smooth- and dimple- tread tires did not. The implication is that
at least a portion of the footprint area of these tires must have been
in intimate contact with the runway surface during the braking process
on water-covered runways. In some instances, deposited rubber was found
31



=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
on the runway for the circumferential-groove-tread tires where the water
depth on the runway was as much as 1/2 inch.
Other treads: In addition to the tire treads already discussed,
studies were made of tire treads having lateral grooves (fig. 4(f)),
large diamond patterns (fig. 4(p)), and small diamond patterns (fig. 4(q)).
In figure 49, faired ~av data obtained for these treads are compared
with faired data obtained for the circumferential-groove-tread
~av
tires Rl and 82M2. It should be mentioned that all the tires in fig-
ure 49 had approximately the same value of An/Ag (see table I) and
therefore exerted approximately equal pressures on the runway surface.
The curves for the two diamond- tread tires shown in this figure indi-
cate that the small-diamond tread (more grooves ) developed larger ~av
values than did the large- diamond tread. This result is in agreement
with the results shown for the circumferential groove tires in that
increasing the number of grooves increases the value of The curves
~av'
of figure 49 also indicate that the lateral-groove and diamond treads
are not as efficient as the circumferential-groove treads in increasing
the braking effectiveness of tires rolling at zero yaw angle on a wet
concrete runway.
TIRE TREAD WEAR
Tire tread wear produces a marked degradation in the braking effec
tiveness of grooved tires on contaminated runway surfaces, a fact clearly
illustrated by figure 48 if it is assumed that the smooth tires 81
and 82 before modification represent tires with the tread worn off com
pletely. This assumption is substantiated by the data in figure 50
(taken from ref. 2), which show that on wet concrete, when tire R2 was
80 to 90 percent worn it developed values of ~max only about half as
good as those it developed when 0 to 50 percent worn. As tire wear
progresses past the point where the tread is worn off completely, the
tire footprint will undergo little change until the tire carcass cords
are exposed, when its appearance is radically altered. For example,
compare the unworn dimple-tread tires D2 and D3 shown in figures 4(a)
and 4(b) with the buffed dimple tire D5Ml, figure 4(d). Tire D5Ml was
buffed down mechanically until the tread was completely removed and the
tire carcass cords exposed. The curves shown in figures 45, 46(b ),
46(c), and 46(e) indicate that at the higher forward velocities on a
water-covered runway, the tire with the exposed carcass cords (D5Ml)
develops slightly higher values than do the less-worn tires. Thus
~av
it is apparent that as a grooved-tread tire becomes progressively worn,
braking effectiveness on wet runways will suffer greatly as the tire
approaches the smooth-tread condition, recovering only a small part of
its original effectiveness after the carcass cords are exposed.
32



=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
An investigation was made with 32XB.B type VII aircraft tires of
different tread designs mounted on a single wheel and on tandem wheels
to examine the effects of dry and contaminated runway surfaces on the
unbraked and braked rolling characteristics of the tires. The principal
results found for the range of conditions investigated were:
1. The unbraked rolling resistance of an aircraft tire increases
with increasing forward velocity on dry and contaminated runway surfaces.
For contaminated surfaces, the rolling resistance increases parabolically
with increasing forward velocity and approximately linearly with depth
and densi ty of the contaminating fluid.
2. The center of pressure of the vertical load on the tire moves
progressively forward of the axl e center line (in the direction of motion)
as the forward velocity is increased during unbraked rolling on both
dry and contaminated runway surfaces.
3. Automatic braking devices that use an inertia flywheel for ref
erence angular velocity tend to become deficient in operation at high
forward velocities on runways contaminated with slush and water because
of the longer time required for wheel spin-up and consequent greater
reference- flywheel spin- down. Chiefly responsible for this effect are
low tire- ground friction coefficients, forward movements of the vertical
load center of pressure of the t ire, and unloaded-wheel brake drag that
develop under certain contaminated- runway conditions and combine to pro
duce extremely low wheel spin- up accelerations .
4. Peak tire-ground friction coefficients developed during braking
on contaminated runway surfaces tend to decrease rapidly with increasing
forward vel ocity. In contrast, peak friction coefficients obtained on
dry runway surfaces appear to be relatively insensitive to changes in
forward velocity.
5. The magnitude of tire-ground friction coeffi cients developed on
contaminated runway surfaces is extremely sensitive to tire tread design;
of the various tread patterns tested, the circumferential-groove treads
exhibited the least degradation of fri ction coefficient, and smooth and
dimple treads the greatest degradation, for the
contaminated- runw~"
conditions investigated.
33
l_ _____ _
---- - - - ---'



=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
6. The magnitude of tire-ground friction coefficients developed
by tire treads with poor skid resistance was increased on contaminated
runway surfaces by mounting tires having these treads on the rear wheel
of a tandem-wheel landing gear.
Langley Research Center,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
Langley Station, Hampton, Va.) May l6) 1962.
------ - -------



=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
.
-------------------------
I
APPENDIX
For those who may desire more detailed information} figures 51
to 79 contain plots of instantaneous tire-ground friction coefficient
as a function of slip ratio for all tires and tire tread designs used
in this investigation. All test runs utilized single-wheel braking
only} with the vertical load Fz)g on the tire approximately equal to
10)000 pounds. As explained in the body of this report} the test runs
in which the automatic braking device was used consisted of from 3
to 22 braking cycles) depending on forward velocity. In those instances
where automatic braking was not used) brakes were applied by a knife
edge-activated solenoid valve) and only one braking cycle per test run
was obtained. The brake hydraulic system was modified for some of the
test runs and incorporated some residual back pressure Ps 1 into the
}
system. These runs are so indicated} all other runs having zero back
pressure.
All test runs in figures 51 to 79 were intended to investigate
braking effectiveness on water-covered concrete surfaces only. In some
instances) however) braking action was initiated before the wet test
section was reached) with the result that in some runs part or all of
a particular braking cycle occurred on dry concrete. Braking cycles
that occurred entirely on dry surfaces are indicated in the pertinent
figures by the words "Dry runway." In those cases where braking started
on dry concrete and ended on wet concrete the transition point is indi
cated by a vertical line marked "A." This should be interpreted to mean
that spin-down values to the left of the line occurred on dry concrete)
while spin-down values to the right of the line) and all spin-up values}
were on wet concrete. The depth of the water on the surface varied from
damp (no puddles) d l ~ 0) to wet (high spots showing) d l = 0 to 0.3 inch)
to flooded (runway completely covered) dl = 0.2 to 0.5 inch)} and these
depth variations are indicated in each figure.
Figures 51 to 79 are arranged in the same manner as table I} that
is) data for dimple treads and modified dimple treads are presented
first) then data for smooth and modified smooth treads) and finally
data for grooved or rib treads. The runs for each tire are arranged in
order of increasing forward velocity) except in figure 79. The decrease
in forward velocity from cycle to cycle -in a particular run is due to
wind and rolling resistance that acts to decelerate the main carriage
upon termination of the catapult stroke.
In figure 79} the runs are arranged chronologically rather than
in order of increasing velocity. Braking tests on tire R3 started with
the new tire) as did the braking tests on each of the other tires. At
35



=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
the conclusion of run 3, however, the tire was considerably worn by
heavy braking action on dry concrete (see run 3, fig. 79). Two more
runs were made on this tire to demonstrate the effect of excessive tread
wear, and upon conclusion of the last run the tire was judged to be
approximately 90 percent worn.
36



=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
REFERENCES
1. Horne, Walter B., Joyner, Upshur T., and Leland, Trafford J. W.:
Studi es of the Retardation Force Developed on an Aircraft Tire
Rolling in Slush or Water. NASA TN D-552, 1960.
2. Horne, Walter B., and Joyner, Upshur T.: Some Effects of Runway
Slush and Water on the Operation of Airplanes, With Particular
Reference to J et Transports. Preprint No. 275A, Soc. Automotive
Eng., J an. 1961.
3. Trant, J ames P., Jr.: NACA Research on Friction Measurements. Proc.
First Int. Skid Prevention Conf ., Pt. I, Virgi nia Council of High
way Invest. and Res. (Charlottesville ), Aug. 1959, pp. 297- 308.
4. Sawyer, Richard H., and Kolnick, Joseph J.: Tire- to-Surface Friction
Coefficient Measurements With a C-123B Airplane on Various Runway
Surfaces . NASA TR R-20, 1959.
5. Harrin, Eziaslav N.: Low Tire Friction and Cornering Forces on a
Wet Surface . NACA TN 4406, 1958.
6. Harrin, Eziaslav N.: Investigation of Tandem-Wheel and Air-Jet
Arrangements for Improving Braking Friction on Wet Surfaces. NASA
TN n-405, 1960.
7. Sawyer, Richard H., Batterson, Sidney A., and Harrin, Eziaslav N. :
Tire-to-Surface Friction Especially Under Wet Conditions. NASA
MEMO. 2- 23- 59L, 1959.
8 . Anon.: Flight Tests t o Determine the Coefficients of Friction
Between an Aircraft Tyre and Various Wet Runway Surfaces. Part II -
Trial s on a Brushed Concrete Runway at R.R.E. Pershore . S & T
Memo 5/ 60, British Ministry of Aviation, Apr. 1960.
9. Anon.: Flight Tests to Determine the Coefficients of Friction
Between an Aircraft Tyre and Various Wet Runway Surfaces. Part I -
Preliminary Instrumentation-Proving Trials at Wisley Airfield.
S & T Memo 15/ 59, British Ministry of Aviation, Sept. 1959.
10. Batterson, Sidney A. : Investigation of the Maximum Spin-Up Coef
ficients of Friction Obtained During Tests of a Landing Gear
Havi ng a Stati c-Load Rating of 20,000 Pounds. NASA MEMO 12-20-58L,
1959·
37



=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
11. Hadekel, R. : The Mechanical Characteristics of Pneumatic Tyres - A
Digest of Present Knowledge. S & T Memo. No. 10/52, British
Ministry of Supply, TPA 3/TIB, Nov. 1952.
12. Smiley, Robert F., and Horne, Walter B.: Mechanical Properties of
Pneumatic Tires With Special Reference to Modern Aircraft Tires.
NASA TR R-64, 1960. (Supersedes NACA TN 4110.)
13. Horne, Walter B. , Stephenson, Bertrand H., and Smiley, Robert F.:
Low-Speed Yawed-Rolling and Some Other Elastic Characteristics of
Two 56-Inch-Diameter, 24-Ply-Rating Aircraft Tires. NACA TN 3235,
1954.
14. Horne, Walter B., Smiley, Robert F., and Stephenson, Bertrand H.:
Low-Speed Yawed-Rolling Characteristics and Other Elastic Properties
of a Pair of 26-Inch-Diameter, 12-Ply- Rating, Type VII Aircraft
Tires. NACA TN 3604, 1956.
15. Horne, Walter B. , and Smiley, Robert F.: Low-Speed Yawed-Rolling
Characteristics and Other Elastic Properties of a Pair of 40- Inch
Diameter, 14-Ply-Rating, Type VII Aircraft Tires. NACA TN 4109,
1958.



=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
----I
TABLE I.- CHARACTERISTICS OF 32x8.8 TYPE VII TIRES OF THE INVESTIGATION
Inflated dimensions (p = 260 lb/sq in. )
Tire Description Diameter, Tread Area ratio, - An
in. radius, in. Ag
Dl Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface (a) (a) (a)
D2 Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface 30.3 6.5 0.87
D3 Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface 30·4 6.0 0.87
D4 Dimple, fabric-reinforced t read (ice grip) 30·5 6.0 0.86
D5Ml Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread modified by (a) (a) 1.00
buffing t o remove the dimples
D6Ml Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread modified by 30.2 6.2 0·59
5 circumferent ial grooves
D7Ml Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread modified by 30.6 6.0 0·75
37 lateral grooves
D8M! Dimple, fabric-reinforced tread modified by 30·9 (a) 0·75
2 zigzag circumferential grooves
D8M2 Tire D8M1 modified by removing rib between the (a) (a) 0.60
2 zigzag grooves
Sl Smooth, all-rubber tread 30.8 6.6 1.00
SlMl Tire 81 modified by 1/2-inch-wide (a) 6.6 0·91
circumferential groove
S1M2 Tire Sl modified by 3/4-inch-wide (a) 6.6 0.86
circumferential groove
S1M3 Tire S1M2 modified by adding two 3/8-inch- (a) 6.6 0.78
wide circumferential groov~s
S2 Smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface 30·9 (a) 1.00
S2M! Tire S2 modified by 4 circumferential grooves 30·9 (a) 0·79
S2M2 Tire S2M! modified by adding 1 narrow 31.1 (a) 0·78
circumferential groove at center line
S3 Smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface 30·9 (a) 1.00
84M! Smooth, fabric-reinforced t read, rubber surface, 30·9 (a) 0.81
modified by a large diamond pattern
S5M! Smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface, 30·8 (a) 0.72
modified by a small diamond pattern
S6Ml Smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber 30.9 (a) 0.62
surface, modified by 7 circumferential
grooves (sine-wave cross section)
Rl Rib, all-rubber tread, 9 grooves 30.6 5.7 0.77
R2 Rib, all-rubber tread, 9 grooves (a) (a) (a)
R3 Rib, all-rubber tread, 9 grooves (a) (a) (a)
R4 Rib, all-rubber tread, 11 grooves (a) (a) (a)
R5 Rib, fabric-reinforced tread, 3 grooves 30.6 5.7 0·79
"Not recorded.
39



=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
g
ITY ·-80-KNOTS WET CONCRETE RUNWAY 0 - 0.3 INCH WATER DE
Figure 1.- Main carriage of Langl ey l anding- loads track. L-60- 2485.1
~~-----.



=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
WHEEL ANGULAR WHEEL ANGULAR VELOCITY
ACCELERATION AND AND ANGULAR DISPLACEMENT
ANTISKID DEVICE
TOOTHED TIMING BELT---./' VERTICAL-LOAD BEAM
DRAG-LOAD BEAM
~'f'"
~.t~~.~,
FORWARD "<:F"
SIDE-LOAD
VERTICAL-LOAD BEAM BEAM
, ~WHEEL
\ I
DRAG-LOAD
BEAM \ I
/
/
VERTICAL AND DRAG
I
I
ACCELEROMETERS
-- I /
/ /
./
BRAKE TORQUE LINKS
v
+" Figure 2.- Test fixture .
I-'



=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
+""
I\)
Figure 3.- Tandem wheel setup at Langl ey landing-loads track. L-60-6948



=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Before test After test
. .
..
..
•
• • , • ~ -
• • • • • .~:!c~:-
t C ••••.••
•
~ ?
M• •
Tire footprint
(a) Tire D2; dimple, fabric- reinforced tread, fabric surface. L-60-69S0
Figure 4.- 32XS.S type VI I aircraft tires . Tire footprint conditions: Fz,g ~ 10, 000 pounds;
+= P = 260 lb/ sq in.
\)I



=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
+
+-
Before test After test
,----
Tire footprint
(b ) Tire D3; dimple, fabric- reinforced tread, rubber surface . L-62- 2062
Figure 4. - Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
----
.---------.~----.. -------~----- -----~--
Before test After test
• -•.,,':: ! ..• ~' -•"
••• • • • •• ••J
. . 11-
••••••••••
,• .J t.-_
D D ~
Tire footprint
(c) Tire D4; dimple, fabric-reinforced tread (ice grip) . L--62-2063
+ Figure 4.- Continued.
\Jl
------- - -. -- --------



=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
+"
0'\
Before test After test
No footprint available
L-60- 3527
(d) Tire D5Ml; dimple, fabric-reinforced tread modified by bl1ffing to remove the dimples.
Figure 4.- Continued.
;
I
[
l_ ___ ___ ______ ---. __
~~ ~ .~&--. ~_.
__ ____ ----~- ~-- - - --------- --



=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
--
----~~ ~~-- ~-.~- -~
Before test After test
........
Tire footprint
L-62-2064
(e ) Tire D6Ml; dimple} fabric-reinforced tread modified by 5 circumferential grooves.
+=
-..l Figure 4.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
+'
(Xl
Before test After test
fftIIIIftlII
Tire footprint
L-62- 2065
(f) Tire DTMl; di mple, fabri c-reinforced tread modified by 37 l ateral grooves .
Figure 4.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
1--
-------..
'-
No photo
available
Before test After test
1_ _- -
Tire footprint
L-62-2066
(g) Tire DBMlj dimple) fabric-reinforced tread modified by 2 zigzag circumferential grooves.
\E Figure 4. - Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
'(g
Before test After test
........
,
Tire footprint
L-62- 2067
(h) Tire DBM2; tire DBMl modified by removing rib between the 2 zigzag grooves .
Figure 4.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
-----1
No photo
available
After test
Before test
Tire footprint
(i) Tire 81; smooth, all-rubber tread. L-6o-6979
Figure 4.- Continued.
\J1
I-'



=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
\J1
I\)
Before test Before test
I. ...n .. rnnnlI
Tire footprint Tire footprint
L-62- 2068
(j) Tire S1Mlj t i re Sl modi f i ed by 1/2-inch (k ) Tire S1M2; t i re Sl modi fied by 3/ 4- inch
wi de circumfer ent i al groove . wide ci rcumferent ial groove .
Figure 4.- Cont i nued.
--
----- ---
------~.~- --------~- ---~-.--- --.-~



=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
After test
Before test
rnnn'II
Tire footprint
L-62-2069
(1 ) Tire 81M3; tire 81M2 modified by adding two 3/8-inch-wide circumferential grooves .
Figure 4.- Continued.
\Jl
\,)J



=== PDF PAGE 57 ===




=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
- ~ I
I
Before test After test
Tire footprint
(0) Tire 83; smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface. rr-62-2070
Figure 4.- Continued.
\J1
\J1



=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
- --- - - - -----
\J1
0\
Before test After test
rn. .....
Tire footprint
I
L-62- 207l
(p ) Tire S4Ml j smooth) fabric- reinforced tread) rubber surface) modified by a l arge diamond
pattern.
Figure 4.- Continued.
L _ _
---------
----~~ --------------.- ---- ------------------~----.....-----



=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
--_.
--~-I
Before test After test
rntmmII
Tire footprint
L-62-2072
(q) Tire S5MI; smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface, modified by a small diamond
pattern.
Figure 4.- Continued.
\Jl
~



=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
I
\Jl
co
Before test After test
••
Tire footprint
L-62-2073
(r) Tire S6Mlj smooth, fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface, modified by 7 circumferential
grooves (sine-wave cross section).
Figure 4.- Continued.
-----
""----"--- ------- -~----c:::_-::::-~- ~------. -~----- ----- --~-----------------~ ..-~---... --- -----



=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
-----~ - -~~- --.
No photo available
Before test After test
I- •••
Tire footprint
(s) Tire Rl; rib, all-rubber tread, 9 grooves. L-60-6978
Figure 4.- Continued.
\J1
\0



=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
0\
o
(t ) Tire R4; rib) all- rubber tread) 11 grooves (after test ). L-60-3426
Figure 4.- Continued.
L
--------
~~------ ------ ------~~- ~....--y----;.r---..---.,---.... ___ ~



=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
1---
-----'-.---- ___~ ______ ~ _______ ___ ____. .... c~ ....... ~----~"""'-~~-......."'"-----..r"''""'-~-.---....---~
--.--~~--:::::..~--~~--.--
Before test After test
IIHlIfiili
Tire footprint
(u) Tire R5; rib, fabric- reinforced tread, 3 grooves . L-62-2074
Figure 4.- Concluded.
0'
I-'



=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
0\
f\)
10 I 11'";'" 2 I 3
°
I 11'°;"'12 I 13
(a) Fabric-reinforced dimpl e tread (similar (b) Fabric-reinforced rib tread (similar
to tires Dl) D2). to tire R5 ).
,0 I ,1";' ',2 I ,3 10 I f'";·",2 I 1 3
L-62-2075
(c ) All-rubber rib tread (similar to (d) All-rubber rib t read (si milar to
tires Rl) R2) R3). tire R4).
Figure 5. - Cross sections obtained from 32XB.B type VII aircraft tires with fabric- reinforced
tread and all-rubber tread.
......
~--~~-- --------------zr-><-------~~--~----- ~~---------------&-_-~ ~.:.r_..___ _____ ~~ ---n.~-~



=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
-----------_.,... .... '-_._-- <---- ---------"
~
I
•I +
--1--+
,- - - +--
~ 19" I
~
Fluid sur face
25"
~.. ~
2"
Concrete runway
Figure 6.- Cross section of test runway surfaces .
0\
\.)I



=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
0\
+=-
Concrete runway
----------~~--Direction or carriage travel
r
T1re center line
t
I I I I I I I
100 800 900 1,000 1,100 1,200 1,)00 I, 00
Di8tance along track, rt
Figure 7.- Schematic diagram showing location of test runways on Langley landing-loads track.
L
---J~'--___________ _
"--'-~_r-O~~ --'-~' '~~--__- ---.f



=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
(a) Smooth asphalt runway (sand finish). . L-59-7643
(b ) Rough asphalt runway (aggregate finish). L-59-7644
Figure 8.- Asphalt runway surfaces used in investigation.
----------- .~-



=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
(J\
(J\
L-62- 2076
Figure 9.- Water- covered concrete runway i mmedi ately before wheel-braking run.
dl = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
~---------------



=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
_________. ..-_______ " _______________ ~ - .7>-_. _.~_ - --------l
L-62-2077
Figure 10.- Spreading detergent and organic foam on concrete runway just before start of a
braked rolling run.
0'\
--J
I



=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
i
-------- Tire for F ~ 0; Fz,g 0
x,g
- - - - Tire for Fx,g = 0; Fz,g = 0
;;Runwa
y surface
/~
F /
X,p, ,/
/
/'
t
Xc (positive forward
of axle c'enter
F z,g line)
Figure 11.- Moments and torques acting on decelerating tire during braked
rolling. (Wheel-bearing frictional torque is disregarded.)
68
-------- ---------- ---



=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
\
r
FREE FULL
ROLL SKID
l1av (51 = 0. 1 to 0.5)
I
COEFF I Cl ENT
OF
cn
FR I ON,
11
o
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
SLI P RATIO, 51
Figure 12.- Determination of ~av.
69
I
~ -~ .... -



=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
Shape of pressure
distribution
(a) Standing tire under vertical load only.
Runway sur face
,
(b ) Unbraked tire rolling at constant velocity on dry runway. O·
TB = O.
"A" Footprint region supported by runway
(vertical load::: Fz,g - Fz,L)
"8" Footprint region supported by fluid
(vertical load ::: Fz,L)
FX,g,f ~
Fx g r~ ~ --~"""'=
, , Fx,g,b
(c ) Unbraked roll ing tire undergoing spin- down on flui d- covered runway.
ex, > 0; TB = O.
Figure 13. - Schematic representation of pressure distributions developed
in footprint region of a loaded tire under various roll ing conditi ons .
70



=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
,- -1
.06
C'@
0
.os
0
~ ~
r... r...
0
.0
I-<~ 0 0
0
0
+ Q > ) 0 OeY
Q)
@
0
I-< ~
11 0
.03
( I Q - ) < ) 0 0
0
r... 0
.02
0 p = 115 lb/in2
0 p = )50 Ib/in 2
.01
(a) Variation of rolling-resistance coefficient.
o'''--__
---l_ __- -'-___- -J.._ __- -I-___. J-___. ..J
.8 o
o
O<I1J 0
.6 o
o
o
[ill
o o
.4 00[0
.2
(b) Variation of vertical-load center-of-pressure
movement. (Posi tive value denotes movement
in direct ion of motion.)
20 80 100 120
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 14.- Vari ation of rolling- resistance coeffi ci ent and vertical
load center- of- pressure movement with forward vel ocity for an
unbraked t i re (R2) rol ling on a dry concrete runway.
71
---.---------------~-~ --



=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
~ 6.70-15 automobile tire (unpublished data from friction-cart
tests; see ref. 3 for description of cart):
Calculations
based on p = 18-40 Ib/in2; Fz, g = 1,875 Ib; smooth tread; dIzO.3 inch
C L ::: 0.7 v
12 inch diameter x 3 inch width tire ( ref.5)
in eq. (5) p = 7.5-28.5 Ib/in2j Fz,g = 100 Ib; smooth tread; dl~0.05 inch
o 32 x 8.8 type VII aircraft tire (rresent test) :
r, = 115 Ib/ in2j Fz ,g = 9,400 Ibj rib tread; d1ZO.5-0.8 inch
Calculations o 44 x 13 type VII aircraft tire (ref. 7) :
based on = 100-150 Ib/in2; F = 20,000 Ib; rib treadj dl·e O.l inch
C L ::: 0.7 o P z,g
17 .00-20 ty,e III aircraft tire ( reL L ):
in eq. (7)
p = 65 Ib/in2j F z ,g = 10,000 Ibj rib treadj d l ""'0.4 inch
120
100
Lio, of ." .,",ot~
80
1
60
(
i
L
r
40
~
!
20
o 20 40 60 80 100 120
Experimental hydroplaning velocity, knots
Figure 15.- Comparison of experimental hydroplaning velocities obtained
from tests on wet runway surfaces and velocities calculated by usi ng
CL = 0·7 in equations (5) and (7).
72
1_ __
--------- ---- ._- - _._- - -- -----.--------------------------------~



=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
2.4 x 102
---------~7-----uWet, d1>0.4 inch
f '-... "-
Wet,
1. Dry d1 = 0.1 _ 0.4 ,"ch
Runway Predicted ..................
hydroplanl.ng
velocity
(eq. (7»
2.4 x 103 1.2 x 1aL
F 'J-
./----- Z - l - g - ~ - - _ __ ------, .......
-.-
1. ,/ ,/ ,/ .8 '- " 0 ~ < ~
\ I / F x ,g ~ ____ --___ .4 ~ . t : l .. " ' "
I ~
\
)]
) .~ __~ ~--~-----L-----k----~----~----L---~~--~0
L x 104
Spin-up moment Fx ,g (ro - 6)
1
Spin-down moment F z,g Xc
I
~
~
~ Spin-up torque impulse
) Wll2:] Spin-down torque impulse
1
-~~---~----*------~---~----~------~----~----~----~
Time, sec
Figure 16.- Unbraked rolling run during which t i re hydroplanes and
spins down t o stop on water- covered concrete runway. Tire D5Ml;
p = 90 lb/sq in.
73



=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
160
80
OL-____ ~ _____ L_ ___~ __~ ~L_ ____L __ ___J __ ___~ ____~ ____~
2 X 103
s::~
..o...
...,'"
' q Q" j ) e" Qn )
rQl) 'e"n
" s::
"q j ..q..j.
'te:l
~
rl
6'n ,,~ -2
..".;
Inter- Torque Change in
10 x 10 4 val impulse, momentum,
k----"A"~
lt2 T dt, I("'l - "'2)'
t l
8 Ib-in-sec Ib-in-sec
"A" 3,740 4,0 0
.~ § Spin-down impulse "Bn 4,190 4,130
..D I ,
[jj
rl Spin-up impulse ~IIBII~
"
'C" "
0
+'
0 '" 4 (ro - 15) - FZ,gXc\/
+s::'
Q I: ) /
~
2
0
+'~
s::
..Q...) 1.0 10 x 10 2
.... "..... Q)~
.... ~
0 Q ) e en n ", ! i
.. "s 0. : . : . :j, .S 5 ' P Q " ) o ' ~ "
Q)
+' "" £
.."... L ' q " j
'" 0:1
r..
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
Time, sec
Figure 17.- Braking cycle for tire R2 on wet concrete. Fz,g ~ 10,000
pounds; p ~ 260 l b/sq i n. ; dl 0. 05 to 0.3 inch; VH ~ 96 to
93.5 knots; antiski d uni t not used. Brake pressure was sequenced
by energizing sol enoid valves in brake circuit through knife edges
positioned on track runway.



=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
____ ---....• . .---.. _...--..-. _____~ _____ ,_("'. ...< a_._ • _________~ ~~--~--~"v'----. ~----.-- ' 1, ____ _ _ ___
-~-l
.~., 160
"
..o o .. I .0 / . ) .I 0 I, ) '" _____ _
'Ql ~.. .Ii LV~
@ ~ : c ;j t?' 80~- -
r'"l .....
.w
8" ]
C"
..o...
.., N .. a
...
" 0
r.l. ...I./..).
" o o " ." ICI . ) o
.".t.l.
"... ....
r'"l
." C .," " _2~1 __ - +~ ______ L-____~ ____- L_ ___~ ______L -____~ ____- L_ ___~ ______L -____~ ____- L_ ___ ~
120 x 103
.S
P.I , ~ Spin-down impulse
rl
~ Spin-up impulse
80
'" .. .___TB
0"
.",
0
. " 0, - F z,g " c
..
C
E
0
:E
~
~---=~
..; 10 x 10 2
"
.."...
...t...J.. ~
...
"0 0 C :j. i'" 5 ' P ~ . .. " . . o N " ! P r i l.
r .. . . .0 0. . , t . . . . , " "' , .\ --, ' - : " " '! ~
2.0 2.L 2.8 3.2 3.6 5.2
Time, sec
Figure 18.- Braking of tire D1 on wet concrete runway with antiskid unit operating.
~ Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 1b/sq in.; PB , 1 = 50 1b/ sq in.
\J1



=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
~
(a) V H 30 knots. ,Arrows indicate positive or increasing direction of traces .
Cycle 2 0.1
I
_ I
=
(b) V 89 knots .
H
Figure 19. - Typical oscillograph tracings obtained during low- speed and high-speed braking on
a wet concrete runway with the fabric- reinforced rib-tread t i re 82M2. Fz, g ~ 10,000 poundsj
p = 260 Ib/ sq in. ; dl = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
'~----~~~_J



=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
,---- -5 __- _________ - - ---
--~.----~-.-.-------~------~~----~ '-----~--
.------~.~--- -~I
I
- -
V\ 1..--1.~ feet ~
l!\ l!\ VwlVvnVv Ivr v
~ ~t
,w
'---/ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~hr
t
J I al >~ v~ /'~ Kft ..
-..-------
1-
, pBI - rr- ~~ W~
TBI
i--{\
V\ V\-ty 'V
Y ~ rv~A .~~f ~
~
--- .d~
1--- ---~ ~ J FzJ \J ~ v ~ / ""
---- .....
---- >
Cycl e 7 1 ,1 selond~
---- Cycle 8
(a) VH = 20 knots,
Arrows indicate positive or increosing direction of traces.
l---- H
.i xl L f- ~ ____ 10 feet r~
trv
~ ~ r--L "" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ I;~ "J>. V\(" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
...---'
.----
i~lL / ¥ ~ L a A ..A/V'jV- ~"" 'II' -v "" J\/\ v· "V' """"" I '- ~ /'
-
PB- c=
i l' v
~ '- TBI ~ ~
Fx
11
~ ~ ~ :vwv "'liN! ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ r.I1/"'V ,.,r'" """".,.,p-, --vJ.l"'f" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
-
f ~/"'" h "'-' ~ -J'- ~ ~
F~J
Cycle I Icycle 12 ,,1 seiond.,., ~ Cycle 3
I I
(b) V B7 knots
H
Figure 20.- Typical oscillograph tracings obtained during low- speed and· high-speed braking
on a wet concret e runway wit h t he all- rubber smooth-tread tire 81. F g 10,000 pounds;
z, ~
--.J p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
--.J l
J



=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
1--
-.J
co
V 10 feet....,., ~t-
" 1 > V [V\I" ~V' .A7 A 1 :; V V'~ -./\~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ """' ..-,. """" r--. r-..
~
[" wI I--
~
~+ ~ ~ ~ r-" IV' -v- .."....,..,
L PSI
11:
~ TIIAf\w~rvl'J~~~~ ~
~ r->r
~- r-Fx FI - --.r"-
1
If'~~~~
cyJle I Z '{YCle 12 0jl sect Cyc I le 3
~
(0) Tire DI ·• VH" 90 knots; p= 260 Ib
-
/.ln2 ; broke b
-
ock pressure = 50 Ib/m . Arrows indicate positive or increasing direction of traces .
- f-
1 J: f-- f-- K 10 teet;-.J
~ ~ ~ J\. 6 ~ ,P-V) ~\ ~ I - / - "'JV ~ ~ ~ vvv" ~ rvv"" ~ 'y.I'" ~ ~ "-'v " ... ' .... 1"'. ...... 'V-"'" rr '
IL w --...,
.c..
t
'v' "i
I PS
t + -....- ---- I.eTs ~ - r------..
~ ~. .J"'V'- f"/ "'" .. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ L Fx --"" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~/"" ~ ~ -,....,.,.. ~ ",-_v ~ J
-~ J r- :
Z Cycle 3
Cycle I Cycle 2 0.1 second_
I I I I I --- I
2
(b) Tire S I; V "89 knots ; P = 120 I b/ln .
H
Figur e 2l . - Typical oscillograph traci ngs obtai ned duri ng hi gh- speed braki ng on a wet concrete
runway with the fabric-reinf orced dimple-t read t i re Dl and the all- rubber smooth- t read
t ire 81. Fz
~
10,000 pounds; d
l
= 0 t o 0. 3 inch.
- -
'-----~------ -~1I~~-----": ..----- -----~----



=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
\
I
L-62- 2078
Figure 22.- Tire appearance after skidding approximately 60 feet on a dry
1
concrete runway.
>
1
~
J
1
I
79



=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
16 X103
·
12
v.o
~~
Or y- + ---.+--d 1 : S 2 lu . s 0 h in. Ro ~ llout - i-----d I W 1 a . t 5 er j n. -----+ I -Ro llout
p : 1.695 slugs/ft3 p : 1.938 slugs/ft3
· Water
v
dl : 0.5 in.
o
16
.
180 ..
~~
-
110
2>~
.0->
160 D~
_ 0
150 0
-•
>
~0
Difference due 10
c lire --.
C
·E .... ~" ............ . --
~·
0-
------ Orop carriage
- -Computed t ire deflection (from vertical load)
,
·
0,- v
'0
~
~ ~
u E
.2 .< .6 .8 1.0 1.2 1.~ 3.~ 3.6 3.8 ~.O
Time, sec
Figure 23.- Typical time history of wheel loads, velocities, and dis
placement during unbraked rolling through sl ush and water troughs
on a concrete runway. p = 115 1b/ sq in. I
I
80



=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
------l
I
I
I p, lb/in2
20 x 102 1 3S 1S 0 } Predic tion of eq. (8)
I
" o 11S}
~
... , . .. . o 3S0 Experimental cia ta
e
~ .o-.
- . / //} 0.1S in:
..~ u .. .. - . o 0 ,,/
"
~ .:1 ...~ / / / ~ - } O.S in. o // / _"" ,,""" / .... , ..... 1 J. O·S in.
~
~
01 ~u
(a) Water depth d o to 0. 5 inch. (b ) Water depth dl 0. 5 to 0.75 inch.
l
20 x 102
I
,/ } 1.00 in.
~ IS! /
.a /
/
1:.0 /
/.
;~ /
.."
~
..
~"- 1'"-
" /
/
" ~ / ~ 0 "f'" / 0 " / / f / J// 0
~ j ~~/
'---~~~~o ---i~~--~gO~--~lM~--~l12 0 A -~ I.'n bi All 1i~1 I~O
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(c ) Water depth d 0.75 to 1.00 inch. (d) Water depth d = 1.00 to 1.75 inches.
l l
Figure 24. - Variation of fluid- displacement drag force with forward velocity and water depth on
a concrete runway. Tire R2.
CD
I-'
J



=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
co
f\)
3
2.0 10
r X
1.5
SLUSH
SINGLE OR FORWARD TANDEM WHEEL
RETARDATION
LB
FORC~
1.0
REAR TANDEM WHEEL
.5
190 LB '\
o
20 40 60 80 100
FORWARD SPEED, KNOTS
Figure 25.- Forces devel oped on unbraked tandem wheel s i n sl ush . Slush depth, 1. 75 inches;
sl ush density, 1.82 sl ugs/ cu ft .
"-----~~--~~-.<-.--.~~_~-----~- _-=S'--__ ..... ~ ____ ~-=-. ____________ --



=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
o p = 115 lb/in2
1:: o p = 350 lb/in2
~
v
~
" .
~
~.!i o 00
. L .
8v
.I.
.)( •0 o
o o
qgCO°O
OOO'-
,
{
,
]
0 0
B
0
.v, o
c v o lEI oIEJ
u
(a ) Water depth d 0.25 to 0. 50 inch. (b ) Water depth d 0.5 to 0.75 inch.
l l
.,
D
c
~
~o
~
B . o o 8
~ ~ . !i o c 0 0 D 0
v • D
!t~ OJ] q§l
..I. . 000 CD 0
Y
v~ cP cP DO
1:: 0
v
u
:0 o 100 120 o 20 40 60 100 120
FOMolard velocity, V , knots
H
(c) Water depth d 0.75 to 1.00 inch. Cd) Water depth d = 1.00 to 1.75 inches.
l 1
Figure 26.- Variation of vertical-load center-of-pressure movement Xc with forward velocity
and water depth for tire R2.
())
\.).j



=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
co
~ .>.,;
15
-rl
0 0
0 Q)
~ ~ 1001
.
>
'"..
'' U ""l
.....
..... "0
:0 '" 50
bO ...
'"
.. ' . " .. 3"
Q) 0'
Q)
~
12 x 103 6 x 103
_LFZ,g
oJ y--- ~
0.. . 8 -------
..0.. ...0... ""
..... "'4 r..x
'"
. -. 0. r. , .l r..t o " Q
~
)
pQo) 0, ~
bO
'"
~ 2~
..," 2 r
Forward of wheel-axle center line
'"
Q) (in direction of motion)
E
>Q) 1
0
E
Q...)
0
:0
Ul •
UQ..).l ..'."..
0. - -1
..I. . x0
0
.
. .I.
,
.
Q) -2
'"
Q)
<.)
-3
-4
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.0 T.l 1.2 -1.3 T.lJ f .51.6
Time, sec
Figure 27.- Variation of wheel angular velocity, verti cal force, drag force, and vertical-load
center-of -pressure movement duri ng a braking cycl e with tire R2 on a dry concrete runway.
VH "'=' 79 knots.
----- --------
--_____________0 --~------- ~----



=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
<.> 150
ell
en
.......
en -
' C " - - - - - - -- ---- -- -
'M
'tl
' 1 " -0 ........ .....---
3~ '-... .......
"-
.;.:,: '--- /' /'
'M
<.>
0
M
ell
~
1-0
'"
M
~ rt>::D /
'" \
M
e el l l l '\.. '/
:i 0
=
v 18 knots
H
=
4 x 103 - - - - V H 89 knots
;::
..
..
t>D
.>.<
~
ell 2
<.>
1-0
..0..
--------------
---- --
' b " O /' ~- ...- -- --
S --- /' ...--
----- -~
..,~
C
ell
~
ell
~
0
~ /" '-- -
h ell . "- --- ..--"
;r:nl "
rn r::
ell 'M
H
P I o <~.>
..,.. ><
0
.1.-,0
ell
r:: -l.a I I I I I I i
< e .. l ) l .2 .3 .t .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
Time from start of braking cycle, sec
Figure 28.- Variation of wheel angular velocity, drag force, and vertical
load center- of- pressure movement during braking cycles with tire 81 on
a wet concrete runway. Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 lb/sq in;
d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
1



=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
Tire Rl Tire S2M2
160
---------------~
7 -- -...... \ ,/
\
VH~ 90 knots \ V , knots
H89 ~
I I
\
64 - - -- - --- _~ I I
V ::::: 40 knots ~ \
H 32 ~ I- I I I
\1)( __ _ __ _ __ \I v\ \I I
I I
\ '"'I \ \I fI, '
\
I I \ I 1/
\ I /"P
(a) Tires with good skid resistance.
__ Dry concrete
- - - - Wet concrete
Tire S3
I
f
I
I
I
I ! .
1.0 1.0
T:iJre, sec
(b) Tires with poor skid resistance .
Figure 29.- Wheel spin- down and spin- up characteristics for tread
designs with good and poor skid resistance on dry and wet (with
water) concrete runways. Data obtained during braking tests on
single wheel s . Fz)g ~ 10)000 pounds; P = 260 lb/sq in. ;
d = 0 to 0. 3 inch on wet runways .
l
86
L
------ ---- - - -- ---- ------------



=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
160
p = 260 lb/in2; V = 89-79 knots
H
120LC---- P = 120 lb/in2; V H = 79-73 knots
------------
-, ,r ---.._ r--- ---- ... -
I I , I \ I ,
8 '~I \ \J I \ \ 'I I \ \ ,
\ ,-' \;
~ 4
(J)
"-
(J)
C ! , , ! ! ! , --.J
tIS (a) Tire S2M2; smooth fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface, modif ied by cutting 5 circumferential
grooves into tire S2.
-u
tIS 160
L.. p = 260 lb/in2; V 89-82 knots
p = 120 lb/in2; V H 93-84 knots
3 120 H
"
>.
+'
80
o
o
......
\
> Q) 40'
L..
..t.I.S.. ,
:J (b) Tire ! Sl; smooth all-, rubber tread. ' -.J
Cl
C
tIS
......
Q) p = 260 lb/in2; V H = 89-82 knots
: . ; J Q = : ) : P = 120 lb/in2; V H 92-84 knots
, , , / ------ r--- -
/
/
----------
- - - -...
,
\
\
'-- - -- - --....
0';' ).. /, '" '" ',. '" "',, "',, ,,',. "',, "',, ,,'x ~', ,, ' ~ ,, 'n 'n
Time, sec
(c) Tire S2; smooth fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface.
Figure 30.- Effect of tire pressure on the spin- down and spin-up characteristics of tires with
smooth and grooved treads. Data were obtained during braking tests of a single wheel on a
co wet concrete runway. Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; d l = 0 to 0.3 inch.
--.J
I



=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
,--
OJ
OJ
Single or front tandem wheel; V = 89-79 knots
H
Rear tandem wheel (tested with tire S2M2 on front tandem wheel); V = 99-92 knots
H
16 _ ____ _ Rear tandem wheel (tested with tire S2 on front tandem wheel); V H = 104-92 knots
u =_7=-:c=-_-=-=-_-_==~ -::,--:-- -:.:---:--..--.. =---_
" U Q ) l 12 ' -- ~ r---.. 0 ...-- ' /f_~_ --- --=-: ~ .::-,-y - .--/. ~ "'='"""~ y -=-::., / /i" =-=--:' V' L J" ~ '.) - ",- - ----....\/ I
\ /I
Ul
' C " 8 \ \ .1 , '
\ '
"t:J "
'"
L. 40,
3
01 "
.>... (a) Tire S2M2, Single or front tandem wheel; V = 99-91 knots
H
.. u o... 16 Rear tandem wheel (tested with tire S2M2 on front tandem wheel); V H = 97-91 knots
Q)
>
L. 12 ~~~\ ./
..'."..
0 ::J > , , '---./
C 1
'" ,, ,I1
.....,.
V
4
'"
.r;
~
0' , i I; A ,'n ,', 'a ,'1; , A ?'n ,'? ,'a ,'~ ,'A "l 'n "l'? "l'a ::l'h ::l'A a'n a':;> a'a '(6
Time, sec
(b) Tire D1.
Figure 31.- Effect of tire location on wheel spin-up characteristics in a tandem wheel arrange
ment. Data were obtained during braking tests on a wet concrete runway. Vertical load per
tire ~ 10,000 pounds; P = 260 Ib/sq in.; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
-----



=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
--- - - -- ,._-
i -~ .- -- ---
\
I
!
\
.8
0
~max
.. : . 1 , . ' .6 0 ~skid OO--CD
0--
~ 0
.<..l.).
.<..>..
'H
'H
<l) .4
0
<>
~
...0...., .
0
-0--Do--o_
.<..>..
.2
r~.. -0-
(a) Tire D5Ml (dimple, fabric-reinforced tread; dimples buffed off).
Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 lb/sq in .
• 6
:1. .6
...,' -o-6D--V-
~
..<..l).
.<..>.. 0
'H
'H .4
<l)
0
<>
0
~
....0..., .
6f
0
u -
..<.>.. .2
r~..
O~--~1~O--~2~O~-~3~O-----'4~O~--~5~O~----6~O~----~7------~80~---~9O~--~l~~
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b) Tire R4 (all-rubber rib tread; 11 circumferential grooves).
Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 lb/sq in.
Figure 32.- Variation of maximum and full- skid tire-ground friction coef
ficients with forward velocity for several tire tread designs. Data
were obtained during single-wheel braking tests on a dry concrete
runway.



=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
.8
o
>'max
.6
:1 o
11 ~skid
..<.V..
.U... .
~ .1.
o
u
.:
...o...,.
-0-0
.~ .2
~
~
o
oL-----~----~------~-----L------~----~----~------~----~----~
(c ) Tires R2 and R3 (all- rubber rib tread; 9 circumferential grooves ) .
Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 lb/s~ in .
• 8
o
:1
..,
--O---O--O~&-OO--------O 0
.: 01"-- 0-:-
.<..V.. o o o
..U...
""' o
" o<"V' •
o
u 0
.: o 0
... o...,. __
------~B~OTD~---- ~
u
~ .2
o
~
I
O'~-----1~O----~20~----3~O------4~o~--~5~o----~60~----~----~O'----r9~O----~100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(d) Tire Dl (dimple, fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface) .
Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds; P = 260 lb/s~ in.
Figure 32. - Continued.
90
-.---------~



=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
.8 -
------~~~-,---,-~---~D~--------~D~----cr-o-----
o = 2
p 200 1b/in
::I. o = 2
P 150 1b/in
~ .6
Ql
'M
"
'M
.<....;
gQl .4 ~Skid~
<::
o
..-< ~----~~~----------------~D~~OO
+'
.."...
o
r!:: .2
o 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(e ) 44x13, type VII, 26- pl y- rating tire, all-rubber rib tread, 5 circum
j
ferential grooves . Unpublished data from NASA landing- loads track.
Fz,g ~ 20,400 pounds .
Figure 32. - Concl uded.
91



=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
\0
f\)
1.0
J ,---- I-Lmax = 0.93 - 0.0011 Pn (reference 12)
..
~s::
.8
(l)
•. .-i
t) o
•. .-i
""'
""'
o(l)
t) .6
s:: t:.
o
•. .-i
~ Experimental data
t)
•. .-i
M
""' .4 () 44 x 13, type VII 5-groove rib-tread tire (V = 45 - 90 knots)
's0:: H
;:s (Unpublished NASA landing-loads track data.)
o
H bD o o Tires R2 and R3 (VH = 34 - 89 knotS)}
I =
H
(l) Tire Dl (VH 27 - 86 knots) 32 x 8.8, type VII tires
. . ~ r ; ! .2 6, Tire D5Ml (VH = 36 - 71 knots) of present investigation.
b,. Tire R4 (V = 39 - 52 knots)
H
~
oI ,..I. . I , I I I I I f
n" .. ,...,... .. / .................. ,.1 .... n ..... _........ ,-
Average tire-ground bearing pressure, p , pounds per sqUare inch.
n
Fi gure 33.- Variation of maximum tire- ground friction coefficient ~max with average tire- ground
bearing pressure Pn for several different tires and tread desi gns on a dry concrete runway .
.----~--~- ?".-----~---- -~- ~ .~ ~---- - ----- ~...--....... -------



=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
data
~perimental
j
o DSMl}
( Tire
o
Tire R4 32 x 8.8 type VII; present investigation
~
V Tire R2 p = 260 lb/in 2
6. Tire Dl
~ Tire 44 x 13, type VII, p = 200 lb/in2} (Unpublished NASA data)
o = 2
Tire 44 x 13, type VII, p 150 lb/in
= 2
Qo Tire 56 x 16, type VII, p 168 lb/in (ref. 13) }
Tire 26 x 6.6, type VII, p = 103 lb/in2} Locked-wheel
~ 2 (ref. 14) drag test s'
=
V Tire 26 x 6.6, type VII, p 230 lb/in V ~ 0.009'knot
H
Q Tire 40 x 12, type VII, p = 124 lb/in2 (ref. 15)
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 34.- Effect of f orward velocity on the ratio of tire-ground full
Ilskid
skid fri ction coeffi ci ent t o maximum fricti on coefficient
Il
max
Data obtai ned on dry concrete runways .
93
,
)
\_-~~



=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
\
\
.6 I
NASA data; )2 x B.B, type VII, 22 ply ratin~ rib-tread tires
. .' . " . " . , o o P p = = 1 2 2 60 0 1 1b b / / i i n n 2 2 ; ; F Fz z, ,g g Z ;::; l ; O 1 , 0 O , O 00 O 0 l l b b . . } Tire S2M2 I
"- •5 <) P = 260 Ib/in2; Fz,gZ 20,000 lb.
tf 1
.'.".. 6 p = 260 Ib/in2; Fz,g ;::;;10,000 lb. Tire Rl
. .. ". ." . . British data; )0 x 7.7, type VII, 16 ply ratinp rib-tread tire I
•L
" ' 0 " \ , , --- p ( B = r i 1 ti 0 s 0 h 1 f b l / i i g n h 2, J t I - te F s z t , g d ':: a ::: t a 7 , , 2 r 0 e 0 f l . b 8 . ) .
.. " 0.,.. ,
, 6.
- - -- p = )20 1b/in2
.
.".. ... ... .) ,
..,
§
0 ~ .2 6~
.'"..
....,.
.., ---
.... ------------~O~------------·
'" • 1
'f
.-<
.-<
r~..
0
(a ) Concrete runways .
• 6
.., NASA data; )2 x B. B, type VII, 22 ply rating tire S2M2
:.;;.! o p = 260 1b/in 2 ; F ~ 10,000 lb.
z,g
"- •5
.,' British data; )0 x 7.7, type V1I, 16 ply rating rib-tread tire
c (British flight-test data, ref. 9)
..'"..
. . .".. . .. . . ---- p = 190 Ib/in2; Fz,g~ 7,600 lb.
.L
'"
"0
c
.0.. .
..
+"
.."...
'
.)
..,
c
" o
0
Il, .2
. '"I. o
.. +.",'
....
'" .1
"i
.-<
.-<
r"..
0 10 20 )0 LO so 60 70 Bo 90 100 110
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b) Asphal t runways .
Figure 35.- Variation of full-skid t ire-ground frict ion coeffi ci ent wit h
f orwar d veloci t y f or several di f f erent r i b-tread aircraft t ires on
water-cover ed concrete and asphalt runways . For NASA data,
dl = 0 to 0. 3 i nch; for Brit i sh data, dl ~ 0.08 i nch.
I
94
\
____
~I
-- ----- -------



=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
--=---
-- ----v-- ---, ,=-__ ____ ,--- ----v
----.;--~- ~ 'S.:s;" ---___ -'>_ - "--~",,,------ __ ~--------
I
'~
I
1.0
06. ~ Q)~o QID
~I1~ ° ° 000° °
:1.al .. o 200&fi{ 00 d o
"b1:: .8 6. 6.
Q) Q)
-..1 -..1 °
o 0
-..1 -..1
"-i"-i
"-i"-i
Q) Q)
o o 0 0 .6
I=: I=:
o 0
-..1 -..1 () Tires Rl and R2 (9-groove rib)
+>+> o
o 0 Tire R5 (ll-groove rib)
- , .. . 1 . - J r . l . <>
"-i"-i .4 Tire Dl (dimple)
.6. Tire D5Ml (buffed dimple)
.2
a 10 20
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 36.- Variation of the ratio of tire-ground friction coefficient ~av with forward veloc-
~max
ity for several tires on a dry concrete runway. F ~ 10,000 pounds; p 260 Ib/sq in.
zJg
\0
VI



=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
o
.6
\0
0\ s 0 : : I ~ p = 260 lb/in 2 ~ p = 120 lb/in 2
..-i
.jJ o
()
. . .H . .. - .. i ' > " .4
:i.
'
;o
s{:
l
j:
.jsJ:: ~ I 0 o
H, Q)
tC..-i
()
Q) OM
s... ...... .2:
OM ...... o
.jJ Q) Sand finish o
Q) ( 0 ) I Sand finish
't"C [] Aggregate finish [] Aegregate finish
H
~ 0
(a) Asphalt runway; d = 0 to 0. 5 inch:
l
.6
s o :: p = 260 lb/in 2 p = 120 lb/in 2
t..- i
. H .-i '>"
...... .4
's{:j: :i.
;ol +s:' ~ : ~~ ~--
~, ~
()
:Q.:).t.-:i
.2
.jJ oQ)
Q) ()
~
H
Q)
~
6 20 40 60 80 100 o 20 40 60 o 100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b ) Concrete runway; d 0 to 0 . 3 inch.
l
Figure 37.- Effect of runway surface on the magnitude of developed while braking tire 82M2
~av
on water-covered runways .
-:=:- ________- - ----"--_-L-~-.~---~----;;?----~~~~ ______;; ;;:-------'-- ...---- .--J



=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
------
~ _M:'--__. . ____ .~~. __ ~-~--------~-- -. -- .. ~.-----~-- ----..- -----------.r---_____ ~. ----"- "--- . l
I
A Water depth 0-0.3 in. (concrete runway)
B-- -- Slush depth 0. 8 in. (br ake plus sl ush drag)
c- - --
Slush drag
:> D-- - - Brake
-;j.C'J .6 E-- --- Dry concrete (approx)
'"
1::
QJ
·rl
· t r l l -------- - - --- -------- .- - - --- --- - ---------
'H
'H
oQJ
tl
1:1
o .h
·rl
+>
CJ
·rl
H
'H
'U
1:1
[3
~
H
bD
I
QJ ,,~
.~
.2
+>
~------------~
QJ
bD -----
-----= -------
~
QJ
~
1------ --------
a 2 L 0 - 40 6 I 0 BO ------ . --100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(a ) Tire D2; dimple, fabric- rei nforced tread, fabric surface .
Figure 38.- Average t i re- ground friction coefficient obtained during si ngl e-wheel braki ng runs
\ .... 0 ..J on slush- and wat er-covered runway surfaces . Fz, g ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 Ib/ sq in .



=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
A Water depth 0-0.3 in. }
B---- Slush depth l.S in. (concrete runway)
(brake plus slush drag)
C - - - - Slush drag (calculated)
l> D--- - Brake
cO
:i E -- - - - Dry concrete (approx.)
.6
- -- -- --- --- ----- - - --- -- ------
.4
----
- -
-----
.2 ----
----
---
--
- --7"
-
o 20 60 80 100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b) Tire 82M2j fabric-reinforced rib tread} rubber surface .
Figure 38.- Concluded.
98
- -----------



=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
=
() Runway wet (d 0 - 0.3 inch)
l
.4 =
[J Runway damp (d 0)
1
>=1 >
0 ro
°H :i
+>
°
U
H
+>" '
r H r; Q >= ) 1 .2
OH
QI U
bD OH
(1j tH
Hrr;
Q) Q)
g
~
0
(a ) Concrete runway; tire 81M3 .
• 6
-0- Runway wet Cd = 0 - 0.5 inch)
l
=
[J Runway damp Cd 0)
o l
>=1 ~ Runway damp (water and JP-4 jet fuel)
0
°H :i
+> .l~
°
U
H
+>" '
H >=1
rr; Q)
°H
QI U
~~
Hrr;
.2
Q) Q)
~ 0
U
o 20 40 100 120
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b) Asphalt runway; tire 82M2.
Figure 39. - Comparison of average tire- ground friction coefficients
obtained on water-covered and damp runways. Data obtained during
single-wheel braking tests . F zJg ~ 10,000 pounds; p = 260 lb/sq in.
99



=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
b
o
=
Water-covered runway (d 0 - 0.3 inch)
l
= 5
~ Organic-foam-covered runway (d 2 - inch)
l
.6
Detergent-foam-covered runway (dl = 1 - 3 i.nch)
:> ~
cO
-:i
'"
~s::
Q)
·rl I.
t) • Ll
·rl
~
~
Q)
o
t)
s::
o
·rl
t .2·-
·ri
J..
~
Q)
bD
cO
H
<D
~
o 20 40 60 80 100 120
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 40.- Comparison of average t ire- ground friction-coefficient values obtained during
singl e-wheel braking tests on foam- and water-covered runways for tire 82M2.
--~-- ------.-!~-~- .-----~ -----, -~~~~----~-=---~



=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
(-
.B
.7
~av ~.64
, r""Y
'\
.6 '\
:i '\ , V, = 81 knots
'\ oonmt.;
..,~
c
. .Q. ;) '\
'\
0 .s .LIB
" " ' - - '' < < ; - - " -.>. £ ., ~av , ~ r.J
0 Q ) ,
0 "-
c
.0., "
...; .4
'
.. 0 . ; '- ......
I; ......
"-< '-
-0 ' '- ....
C
::>
0 .J ....... ....
H ....
bD
I ........
Q)
.I
. .
;
;
E-<
.2 -----
Dry concrete con~aminated with rubber
(deposited on runway during previous
braking run); V = 77 knots
H
o .1 . 2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .B .9 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
Figure 41.- Effect of rubber contamination of a concrete runway sur£ace on the braking fric
tion developed by a 44x13, type VII, 26- ply- rating aircraft tire. Fz,g ~ 20,400 pounds;
b
p = 150 lb/ sq in. (Unpublished NASA landing-loads-track data. )
f-'



=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
>
'"
:1- -0- Fz,g~ 10,000 Ib
..,~
" - -0-- Fz,gZ 22,COO Ib
..Q...) 'l
..(.).
'-<
'-<
Q)
0
() +
"
.0.,
'M
()
·.r..l
'-<
"0
"
"
0.. .
.2
OJ)
I
Q)
.~
+'
"Q")
.'.."..
>Q) 0
(a ) Average tire- ground friction coefficient ~av'
'"
()
' Q " ) --
'-
.". ' ' " ".. 16 -0- --- --
"0 - 0 0
'."..
0 c: ~ ----.
'M
+'
'.".. 12
Q) D
.-i
Q)
()
()
'"
0-
"
cI:
8
'M""
'"
.-i
Q)
;Q::)
;.
"Q") 4
..'."..
>Q)
o 20 40 60 120
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(b) Average wheel spin-up acceleration.
Figure 42.- Average tire- ground friction coefficients and wheel spin-up
accelerations obtained during single-wheel braking runs with tire 82M2
at ground vertical loads of approximately 10JOOO and 22JOOO pounds.
Wet concrete runway; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch; p = 260 Ib/sq in.
102
I
--------------~



=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
--~ -------~------.-----...__,._v_ _----...---..
.6
~o
~"
~
> U~~D
III
.:.,l . .2
c
..Q..).
. .. . o. . . . . Tire 81; concret e runway Tire 82,. concrete rUffilay - , - ~ 17'1::£)
....
~ 0
o
c
...o...,.
..o... ~ p = 260 lb/in 2
..'"..'
1:l - - 0- - p = 120 lb/in 2
C
o"
"'""' .6 -~
1
Q)
...~, ~,
:Q:)
... .4 (:1
~ Q) ~ o
.2'- "
"-
coa,,-,~
Tire 82M2; concrete runway Tire 82M2; aspbalt rUffilay "
o t 2 ( 0 40 « 60 ! 80 I 10 I 0 o 20 40 60 80 100 120
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
(a ) Average t ire-ground friction coefficient ~av.
Figure 43. - Effect of tire inflation pressure on average tire-ground friction coefficients and
wheel spin-up accelerations . Data were obtained during single-wheel braking tests on wet
runways for several different tires. Fz, g ~ 10,000 pounds; dl (asphalt) = 0 to 0,5 inch;
b
d (concrete ) = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
VI l



=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
8
4
~ Tire 82M2; concrete runway
~ ol·--------~-------J--------~------~--------L-----~
"-
c(f)
'"
'M
"0
2
~ 12 x 10
c
o
' + M -' ~ p = 260 lb/in 2
'"
r Q ~ l ) 8 - - 0 - - p = 120 lb/in 2
Q)
tJ
tJ
'"
Po
::l
rI:
4
'M
Po
(f)
rl
Q)
.< Q :: ) Tire 81; concrete
~
0L-----~------~-------L------~~_1
Q)
b!J
~
Q)
<~
8
4
Tire 82; concrete runway "-
O,------~2~~------~4~'0~----~6~O------78bD~-"-~[~I~lOO~'------~i20
Forward velocity, VH' knots
(0 ) Average wheel spin- up acceleration.
Figure 43. - Concluded.
104



=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
1--
--. ~~~--I
BuB
~ Direction of Motion
Rear Forward
Tandem Wheels
---{)--5ingle or forward tandem wheel
- - 0-- Rear tandem wheel
o o
Dimple tread, tire D2 5-groove rib tread tire 52M2
o o
.6 Dimple tread, tire D2 (S-groove rib 5-groove rib tread tire 52M2
tread tire 52M2 on forward wheel). (S-groove rib tread tire 52M2
on forward wheel)
.L
;:; ~-~--
"-
+'
. " i . J 8 . .2 o
""'
'l1
o
u
g 0
+""''
~ ~ o 5DlOoth tread, tire 52 O S-groove rib tread tire 52M2
§ .61 o 5mooth tread. tire 52 (S-groove rib o 5-groove rib tread tire 52M2 (smooth.
tread tire 52M2 on forward wheel). tread tire S2 on forward wheel)
~
1: __ _
j .L '4~ ~"-
~
~
H
~
~
.2i ~~
oI mI ~ I w! ~ I ~ I ~ I o 20 40 60 o 100 120
Forward velocity J VH ' knots
(a ) Average tire- ground friction coefficient ~av'
Figure 44.- Effect of tire position in a tandem wheel arrangement on average tire- ground fric
tion coefficients and wheel spin-up accelerations developed during braking tests on wet
b
\Jl concrete runways . Fz,g ~ 10,000 pounds per tire; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d l = 0 to 0.3 inch.



=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
b
0'1
Dimple tread, tire D2
1_2 x 102 o Single wheel
[] Rear tandem wheel {tire S2M2
Rib tread, tire 52M2
on front tandem wheel)
o
Single wheel
o Rear tandem wheel (tire 82M2
8 on front tandem wheel)
C\ .ct J u,) - --00 -- __ - o <> Rear tandem wheel(tire 82
';n-- o on front tandem wheel)
a
o a r< l 4,- 0-
'd
al <>
H 2
12 x 10
a~ o
0
or<
1il
0
o---o~~<o>
.- Hc c t t - u u ) ) I Smooth tread, tire 82 8 o 0 o o
al 2 o o
go 12 x 10 Single wheel
aI [] Rear tandem wheel (tire S2M2
O.M, on front tandem wheel) 4
Po
.-c
c
-u
u
I
8 '0- .....
. ; Q . I -0
:
c
i
u
f
ot
2
I
0 4
I
0 6
!
0 8
I
0 10
!
0 12
I
0
Hcu
4
~
o 20 40 60 80 100 120
Forward Velocity, VH ' knots
(b) Average wheel spin-up acceleration.
Figure 44. - Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
---
------.
- -
I
o REAR TANDEM WHEEL, 0- 0.3 INCH WATER DEPTH
o REAR TANDEM WHEEL, 1.5 INCH SLUSH DEPTH
a -
- - SINGLE WHEEL, 0.3 I NCH WATER DEPTH
.6
--- SINGLE WHEEL (LESS SLUSH DRAG), 1.5 INCH
SLUSH DEPTH
AVERAGE .4
FRICTION
COEFFI Cl ENT,
-{Jom
~av
.2 -....-...._----o-
0
..........
a
20 40 60 80 100
FORWARD VELOC ITY, KNOTS
(c ) Average tire- ground friction coefficient !-lav for tire 82M2 braki ng in sl ush and water.
b Figure 44.- Concluded.
-.l
_____ J



=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
b
OJ
-------- Tire D5Ml - Smooth (buffed dimple), rubber and carcass-fabric
> contact surface
ro
:i -- --- Tire Sl - Smooth all-rubber tread, rubber contact surface
... Tire S2 - Smooth fabric-reinforced rubber tread, rubber contact
+>
r::; surface
(l) ---- Tire S3 - Smooth fabric-reinforced tread, rubber and tread
'M
() fabric contact surface
'M .6
'H
'H
(l)
o
()
r::;
o
'M
.4
~ \ "
'M
r....
'H ~~ .,
'0
r::;
"0-
;:l
o
r,.... .2~·
Wl
\l)
.~
+>
~ (l) o· 2 1 0 4'0 60 8'0 Ibo lko
(l)
>
c:x: Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 45.- Effect of tire tread material on the average tire- ground friction coefficients
developed during single-wheel braking tests on wet concrete runways. Fz)g 10)000
~
pounds; p = 260 Ib/sq in; dl = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
L-__. _ _ . --
~
----------------------~~-~~--------



=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
·6
.4
~~
~
• (a) Tire 01.
OL-_ d P_B l = ,l O = _ t _ 5 o 0 _ O I_b . / 5 in 1n 2 _ . ._ j __- L ~ _ ___ __ (b) Tire 02. ~
~ ~ ~ ~
.6
5F
.4
.2
0,.
(c) Tire (d) Tire D4.
oL-__ ____ ____- L_ ___ __
~ ~ ~ ~
.6
~
(e) Tire 05Ml. (r) Tire D6MJ..
0
.6
--O-TireD8Ml
- - -0 - Tire D8M2
.4
.2
(g) Tire 07MJ.. (h) Tires 000 and 08l!2.
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 1
Forward veloc i ty, VH ' knots
Figure 46.- Variations of average t ire- ground fri ction coefficient
wi th forward velocity for the di fferent tires investigated during
singl e-wheel braking tests on a water- covered concrete runway.
Test conditions, except where noted, are Fz, g 10,000 pounds,
~
p = 260 Ib/sq in., and dl = 0 to 0. 3 inch. Shaded circle symbols
i n this figure denote average values over several braking cycles
due to inability of tire to spin up after brake release.
109



=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
o
(j) Tire 81;
o
Water depth 0-0.3 inch
o
Damp runway, water depth<='zero
(1) Tire 81M3 .
• 2
(0) Tire 82Ml. (p) Tire 82M2; p = 260 1b/in2.
0'~----~2~0----~4~0------6~0------~80------1-L00 o 20 ~O 60 100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 46. - Continued.
110
I
~



=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
~
.2 ~
(r) Tire 53. ~
.6
.4
o
(8) Tire 54Ml . (t) Tire 55Ml.
• 4
.2
(u) Tire 56Ml. (v) Tire Rl.
o~----~----L-----L-____L -__~
.6
.4
.2
(w) Tire R4. d1 ~ 0 to 0·5 in.; PB,l ~ 50 Ib/ in2. (x) Tire R5.
o
20 40 60 80 100 o 20 40 60
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 46.- Concluded.
III
I
L_



=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
f--'
f--'
I\)
.6
~8:::::::::~8j
Dimple-tread tires (tires Dl, D2, D3, and D4)
uTilI C
: c > tl .5~ Smooth-tread tires (tires Sl, S2, and S3)
:i
"'
+>
C
<lJ
'M
()
'M I
'H .~
'H
<olJ
()
c
o
'M
~ .3--
'M
H
'H
'0
C
;:l
o
~ . 2--
I
<lJ
.~
+>
<lJ
~ .1
H
<lJ
~
o 10 20 50 60 70
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 47.- Average tire-ground friction coefficients obtained with smooth- and dimple-tread
tires during braking tests on a water-covered concrete runway. Fz,g 10,000 pounds;
~
P = 260 Ib/sq in.; d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
l
L._
.------"----- ___ ______
-~ ,~ ~_~~_ ,-------------------v-~ .~.



=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
-----------.--.---.~.~-~- - --- .---~---~------" I
I~-
---- Smooth-tread tire 52
.6
Smooth-tread tire Sl - - Tire 52 modified by 4 circumferential
- - - - - Tire Sl modified by 1 circumferential grooves ( 52Ml )
groove ( SlMl ) - Tire 52 modified by 5 circumferential
--- -- Tire Sl modified by 3 circumferential grooves ( 52M2 )
.4 grooves ( SlM3 ) '- ==--
'---~ "
'~" --------::-..::::--:----::----
::1- ----
--- --------
+>~ .2~ ~ ---
J::
Q)
·rl
()
·rl I
'H
'H (a) Tires Sl, SlMl, and S1M3· . (b) Tires 82, 82Ml, and 82M2.
Q)
0 __ I
() 0
J::
0
-rl
+>
()
·rl
'H I-< .6
"0 Dimple-tread tire D2
,; 0 J .: : : .l - - - -- - D D i i m m p p l l e e - - t t r r e e a a d d t t i i r r e e m D2 o dified by 5 -- - - - D c i i m rc p u le m -t f r e e r a e d n t t i i a r l e z m ig o z d a i g f ie g d ro o b v y e 2 s (DBM1)
bD circumferential grooves (D6Ml)
Q I ) .4
.~
+>
----
Q) " -
',b ".D. "
Q) .2
~
(c) Tires D2 and D6ML (d) Tires D2 and D8Ml.
0 2 I 0 4 1 0 6 I 0 8 I 0 100 o 20 40 60 80 100
Forward velocity, V , knots
H
Figure 48.- Braking effectiveness of smooth- and dimple-tread tires on water-covered runways
before and after circumferential grooves were cut into tire tread. Fz,g 10,000 pounds;
~
~ P = 260 lb/sq in.; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
~
\)j



=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
An/Ag
Tire Rl (9 circumferential grooves) 0.77
Tire S2M2 (5 circumferential grooves) 0.78
Tire D7Ml (37 lateral grooves) 0.75
~ Tire s4Ml (large diamond) 0. 81
:i
Tire S5Ml (small diamond) 0.72
"
~
s.::
Q)
·rl
C)
·rl .6
Ct-i
Ct-i
Q)
o
C)
s.::
o
·rl
t .4
·rl
H
Ct-i
'"d
§
o
H .2
b.O
I
Q)
H
·rl
~
Q)
b.O
~ 0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Q)
:>
c:x: Fonlard velocity, V H , knots
Figure 49.- Wet-runway braking effectiveness of tire treads with lateral
grooves, diamond patterns, and circumferential grooves. Data obtained
during single-wheel braking tests on a wet concrete runway.
Fz,g ~ 10JOOO pounds; P = 260 Ib/sq in.; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
114
L



=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
1--- -
Dry concrete Wet concrete
(0 to 1.0 in. water)
.8
.6 ~ 0 0
O~
~max .4 o ~
Tire R2
.2 0 Ti re R3
0
I
!
(a ) 0- to 50-percent worn.
!
! .8 6
80 percent worn
o
.6 80 to 90 percent worn
.4
\ ~max
(
1
.2
o
0 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100
(b ) 50- to 90-percent worn.
Figure 50.- Effect of tread wear on maximum t ire- ground friction coeffi
I
\ cient ~max for t i res R2 and R3 (9 circumferential grooves, al l
1 rubber t r ead) . Fz, g ~ 10, 000 pounds; P = 260 lb/sq in.
1
115



=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
.----
I
0 ~ ~ \ .6 ° c9 0 Cycle I, VH • W. knots Cycle 2, VH • 39 knots
° o cg
0 Spin-down
8
0 o
.4 I- 0 Spin-up CO 0
0
0 C
0 0 00 0 0 0 0 0
0
0 0 0 @
.2 I
Dry runway Dry runway
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
'"
,;
c r
. . <. . . . ~ . . . . . .l ., ~ 0,0" ,. " . " _" Cycle 5, v H • 37 knots r Cycle 7, V H • 35 knots
8~
.. c 0.. 8 o oc9 o 0 CO ~ o~
.~... .2 Cb QJ oEl ff:y0 0 0 0
'h" B
0
00 0
0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4 .6 0 .2 .4
.4
Cycle 9, VH • 34 knots Cycle 11, V • 3J knots
H
00
.2 ~ 0 0 lo 0 o @ 0
o CO 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o OJ 00 0 oC
0
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a) Run 1.
Figure 51.- Tire Dl, dimple fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface . Antiskid unit operating;
p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0. 2 to 0.5 inch (except where noted); PB,l = 50 lb/sq in.
l
...
----~<-------~ -~--- --------~.~



=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
I --.J' __ ~ ______~ _~. ____~ -____ --- - _..r-'.L..-..-______ - ----_._- --~--- -----., I
.8 ,
Cycle 1, V - 49 knots
H
o
Spin-down
o
0 Spin-up
.6 f--- @
00
0 CIA II
.4 I .4 Cycle 3, V 48 knots Cycle 5, V u7 knots
H H
&
0
1 8Q)
.2 .2
- + rQ < < : l ' 0 01 0 0@@J c:P~OO ~
.-.r 0 .<. 00 0
....
Ql
0
0
.r0 < < : 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .U o .2 .4
+'
0
-.r.<.
r..
.4
Cycle 7, V 46 knots Cycle 9, VH 44 knots Cycle 11, V 41 knots
H H
.2
6f1«D<0 ~ o o 0 c §) 800 o o <Q() ~ 0 0 t J O
o .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 .6
Slip ratio, sl
(b) Run 2 .
I-'
I-' Figure 51.- Continued.
~



=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
,-
Cycle 2, VH := 62 knot3
°
'A'
.4. Cycle h, VB :: 60 knot.s
°
0
10 0
°
.2
0 °1 0° ° 0 0 0 6b'O 0c90~ ~
0
0
--1
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 .2 .4 .6 .2 .4
r
. .4 I Cycle 5, vH :: 59 knots Cycle 7, VH :: 58 knots Cycle 9. VH ;; 56 knot:!! Cycle la, VH =: 55 knots
~c
~ '~ o
1 c i~~OD 0 o 0 ~ o o 0 0 00 '0&
~
E o
.2 .4 .2 .4 .2 .2 .4 .6 .8
(c ) Run ) .
.6
I
, -------- Cycle 1, VH :: 88 knots
BttB Ii C"YC"le 2.., "VH .' 66 k no,"
l
o
.4 0 ~Cycle 3, Vii :: 8) knots Spln-dovn
o
Spin-up
~ J
8 o 0,<\ n •• ,"
~ .2 0
~ o
.t: Dry O~@CD~
runway
o
I
.2 .4 .6 .8 loC
Sllp ratio, 91
Cd) Run 4.
Figure 51.- Concluded .
-. --"'---------
.......... -----~- ~ --- - -"'00.....- - - --_.---...--..-_ -. ----- .-.----===---~-



=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
- I
-~-----
I
Cycle 2, VII = u6 knoLl! Cycle ), VII = 47 knots Cycle S. VH = 46 knots
o o o o 00 0 0 0 ~ 8 ° °0 <EJ ° o°Q:POOO6l
o
I I I I I
.2 .4 .6 ) 1.0 .2 .4 .6 .2
.2 a COrl °
IlD D C O yc le 0 6 0 . VH 0 :;: 0 ',6 0 k ' n ots o oc Cy o cle o 7, ~ VII :: Lit knoLl! Qo§< Cy § cl Q e ~ 9, % \ = il2 knots @ C ;rela 0 11, O V @ II 0 :: O hO O kno t::. 0 0
n I . I 2 .1I . .2 .4 .2 .4 .2 .4 .6
(a ) Run 1.
t::ycle 1, VH = 61 knots
c
"A"
.4
Cycle 7. VH = 8S knots CYcle J, VM = 81 knoLs Cycle L, VH = 79 kn!:t.!!
o
o
.2reo o o
o o 0 00 @° oCt:a£ "i§ o lC ° c o ~O ct 9
00 LJ C
.6 I, .I4 .~ .l .2 .J,
.4 DO
Cyel~ S, VH :: 78 knot.s Cvc11" 6, VII :;: 71 knots Cycle 1, Vli :;: 76 kllots
Dry spin-up o
I1J) o Spin-dOWn
o o o 0 8 C 0 e o ° 0 0 ° 8 c/¢J C Spin-up
C
, I
.2 .4 .2 .lI
SUp ratio, 51
(b) Run 2.
Figure 52.- Tire Dl, dimple fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface . Antiskid unit operating;
P = 260 lb/sq in.; d l = 0 to 0. 3 inch (except where noted); PB , 1 = 50 lb/sq in.
~
t)
~



=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
B
o
Spin-down
o
Spin-up
.6- Cycle 1, V 86 knots
H
~
r---- ------ Cycle 2, V 83 knots
::I.
H
...
+> A"
!:: II
.4
Q) ,----- Cycle 3, V 80 knots
.,-i
u H
.,-i o
Ct-i
Ct-i [ CYCle
oQ) 4, V = 76 knots
u H
!::
o
- + , > -i .2
u o o
.,-i
rx H .. o
o
o~~~
008
a' ,
.2
.4I
.6
I
.8
I
1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(c ) Run 3.
Figure 52.- Concluded.
1_
.----.~----- ~- --.--~



=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
--- - _. - ----._-._---- -----_._. ----- -------
!-----~-.-
.L
I
Cycle 1, VH :: li1l knots Cycle 2, VH :: IJ2 knots Cycle ), VH :: Ll knots
.2~ 0 0 0 @0 8 en 0 ~ o o o ;) o o o o o o o D O
0 o
0
I I I I
.? .L .6 .6 .2 .!J .b .6
"" .L
~. Cycle t.. VH :: LI knot.s Cycle $, V H :: uO knots Cycle 6, vH :: LO knots
~
. " g o. GJ o o 0 o 00 @ o 8 o o o o o o o 0 0 00 Cb o
.
..u. .
.
.
" o
.2 .L .6 .e 0 .2 .L .6 .8
.h
Cycle 7, V H :: Ito knots Cycle 6, VH = )8 knot.s
o o
.2 {) 0 8 o o o ° o 0 c9 o 0 0 § ° o o o S Sp p i i n n - - u d p ow n
Q .2 .L .6 .6 1.0 o .2 .L .6 .8 1.c
Slip ratio, 81
(a) Run 1.
Figure 53.- Tire D2, dimple fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface. Antiskid unit oper-
ating; p == 260 lb/sq in.; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
I-'
r\)
I-'
-----"



=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
..
r
I-'
f\)
f\)
"'[ fa
Cycle 1, VH :: 57 knots Cycle 2, VH = 56 knots r& Cycle ), VH :: S5 knots
0 0 ,0 a , 0 0, 0 6' ~cP CD 0 0 0 'b 0 0 '" a
"- 0 .2 .tt .6 .6 l.C o .2 .Ii .6 o .2 .It .6
~
~
t:
13 Cycle h, -"H :: $) knots Cycle S, V :: 52 knots
H
'r . OOOOOO~ O ~O"0
,
o .< .L .6 .2 .'L .6'
(b ) Run 2.
CO/de I, VH :: 6) knots C.vcle 2 J VH :: 61 knots Cycle ), VH :: 61 knots Cvclp II, VH :: 60 bets
.2
eO0" :J 0 0 0 0 ~ ad' o ~'~ 0 , ~OO 'b0 , 0 \l 0° ~0C\) o~ 0 00, c<b ,
~- 0 .2 .h o .2 .L o .2 .10 .6 o .2 .h .6
~
~
2
~
c
'Ill
r-vcle $, VH ::: 59 knots
o Spin-down
... o
00 ~ Spin-up
0 0'0
o .2 .h .6
Sli~ ratio, 51
(c) Run 3.
Figure 53.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
l~-·-· ----"""--~.-. --- -- - ~------- - ,
.. I . .2 ~ Cycle 1, VH = 8) knots Cycle 2, VH = 80 knots Cycle ) , V H 16 knots
"
"0 .:.,1
' {j)ce>
. . c o. . . , . .." c " .. I~CbO OO~ 0 1J OO@ Q3 BCD ~
.".. ........
" I
'" 0 .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 o .2 .1.
(d) Run 4.
Cycle 1, VH 99 knots Cycle 2, VH = 96 knots Cycle 3, VB 93 knots Cycle I., VH 92 knots
..I. .• 2
""o ..:,1
°
. .0 c . . , . ..". c " .. ' ~ 0 GO &0 ° qji'§9 db~~o~
.".. ........
t; o o .< .w .6
(e ) Run 5.
.. I . .2 Cycle 1, V H 100 knots Cycle 2, V H 97 knots k~~~ ,~" o
""o :1 J. ' " " 95 Spin-down
' o
. .o c . . . , . . ~ . "".. 8§9o~ OJ~ Spin-up
.".. ........
' " " a .2 .1; a .2 .1. o .? .11
Sl ip ratio, sl
(f) Run 6.
Figure 53.- Concluded.
~
r\)
\)I
,



=== PDF PAGE 127 ===
-_
- ..- ----------
l
~ .~
~ Cycle 1, VH = 14 knots 0 0 Cycle iJ, VH = 14 knots
o 0 0 0 0
o
0 0 0
.2 f- o 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 - ~ <..J
0
.6
I Cycle 7, VH = 12 knots Cycle 10, VH = 11 k .... ot s
0
r
0
.4 0 o
:1
'2- o o o o 0 o
..U ~ .~. 0 0 0 o Spin-<Iown o 0 o o o
...". .2 1 0 Spin-up o
u0~
o
c
...!,l 10 Cl
.~
to.
0
.h r 0 0 0 0 o Cycle 13, V H o = 9 knots o 0 DO o Cycle 16, VH § = 8 knots
0 o
0
.2 ~ 0
o
n .2 ·4 .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a ) Run 1.
I ' ~~ Figure 54.- Tire D3, dimpl e fabric- reinforced tread, rubber surface . Antiskid unit oper
l ating; p = 260 lb/ sq in.; d l = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
. -------- ..• -----~.-.--- ----"'-----.-.



=== PDF PAGE 128 ===
r--._--
--~----~---.--~---~ -~----~- --~-
.4 .
Cycle 1, VH = 49 knots Cycle 2, VH = 48 knots Cycle ), V
H
= 46 knots
0
.21--0 0 0 § 0 0 000 too <m @ @ 0 loo 0 o 0
8 0 0 o 0
L
..
" 0 0 .2 .4 .6 .S 0 .2 .~ .6
!:
..!..!.
u0~
"
.$.l
~ .4
'"" Cycle 4, V~ = 45 knots Cycle S, VII = 44 knots
o
Spin-down
.2 I- 00 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~o~ 0 00 0 0 o Spin-up
f€
1
0 .2 .4 .6 0 .2 .4 .6
(b) Run 2.
Cycle 1, VH = 98 knots Cycle 2, VH = 96 knots Cycle ), VH = 95 knots Cycle 4, v H = 9) knots Cycle S, V H = 91 knots
1"- . '~0 ~
rc"",
~e to~%~Ce ,
OOOOOC:OcP '2Jeen 0
{ CO
I
0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4 0 .2 .~ 0 .2 .4
Slip ratio, "1
(c) Run 3.
~ Figure 54.- Concluded.
~



=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
......
f 0 \) \ .L I 00 0 Cycle 1, Vp, = 2L knots 00 0 0 0 Cycle 2, VH = 2) knots
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
.2 f- 0 0 o 0
00 Spin-down 0
o
0 Spin-up
0
0
.L r o 0 0 Cycle J J VH = 22 knots [~ 0 Cycle L, VH = 22 knotso
0 0 (; ° 0 0 0
0 0 0
.2 J...
"-
'2
.
~
8 0 r
. j. ! " : i .L 00 0 Cycle 5, VH = 22 knots LO 0 0 Cycl 0 e 6 J VH = 2l knots
r~ 0 0 0
0 0 00 0 0 0
.2 f-O
0
0
L
0
.L r Cycle 1, VH = 21 knots
[00
Cycle 6, VH = 20 kr.ots
0 0 0 °0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
.2 I-~
o .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ra tic, 91
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 55. - Tire D4, dimple fabric-reinforced tread (ice grip). Antiskid unit operating;
p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0 . 3 inch.
l



=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
---- ---~ -~.-.-
---~~----.~--
l~
)
.4
I
Cycle 1, VH ::: 1.,9 knots Cvcle 2, VH ::: L8 knots
.2 t--
CbO
° o
°
c:P o o Spin-down <90 0 0 0 0 ° o
D U Spin-up &
~
0 r
.4
Cycle J, V H ::: u7 knots Cycle L, "H = L6 knots
' ~
00
.".- 0 o 0 0 0 o 0 0 ~o 8 8 o °
c
] ----L_
t 0
8
.4
c
~ Cycle 5, VH ::: L6 knots Cycle 6, VH ::: taL knots
...
~ o
o
.2 f- ° 00 n 00 c:;l 0 o 00 o o 0 0 o
~
o
0
L
o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
J.4
Cycle 7, VH ::: LLa knots
0
en 0
0
0 0° 0°
0
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(b ) Run 2 .
......
f\) Figure 55.- Continued.
--.l
J



=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
k'O
,2 Cycle 1, VH = 79 knots '.d, ' .•" • n ••• " ~ I,-,. ~ CY o cle o ~" ."'''
f f- \ - ) ' ~~" ~ Cl nr J, V" -. n '00"
OJ cEO ,
Cb
I
"-
..,' 0
c
~
"
...<
t
QI
8
g
:;J 2 Cycle 5, VH = 7L knots ~n.oo"
E~ o
Spin-down
o
Spin-up
o
(c) Run 3.
b
, ., ~cP 00 '~ . •" '," ..." ~'~d' ' . •" '," '"", ~" J ••" ', " '00" ~oo ;~ ' .•" • " _Co
o
i 0 o .2 .L o .2 .L o .2 .L
..Q.<I
."..
.....<.
QI
8
g
...<
~ 2 Cyel", 5, VH = 92 knots
.~
o .2 .L
Slip ratio, 51
(d) Run 4.
Figure 55 .- Concluded.
-_._----
~'------.



=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
~.--~----
----
- -- ---,-""
.L I Cycle 1, V H = la9 knots Cycle 2, VH = 1.!8 knots
~ f ~ @:-::~'~-"
000 0 o
.2 I- o 0 0 0 ::: o :J 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 o O DS 00 0 § ~ 0 00
I
o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .4 .6
.".. .4 r Cycle L, VH = 46 knot. Cycle 5, V H = UL knot.s Cycle 6 J VH = hI knots
c
~ r o o
~ ()
. 8 c .. . .2 ~ 0 o 0 i l2 0 >.l '- li ' 0 0 00 ~ 0 000 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~0Q§ 0 0 0 cP c
~
.:: I
o -----L
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .4 .6
.4 Cycle 7, VH = 41 knots
G Spin-down
o
Spin-up
.2 f-~O OJ
@:!.O DO&""
o
o .2 .4 .6
Slip ratio, 51
(a ) Run 1.
~ ~ Figu di r m e p 5 l 6 es .- . T A ir n e t i D sk 5M id l , u d n i i m t p o le p e f r a a b ti r n ic g - j re p in = f o 2 r 6 c 0 e d lb t / r s e q a d in m .j· o d d i l f ie = d 0 b .2 y b to u f 0 fi . n 5 g i n th c e h t ( i e r x e c e t p o t w re h m e o re v e the
noted)j PB , 1 = 50 l b/sq in.
J



=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
r
I-'
VoJ .4 Cycle 1. V H :: 54 knot.s Cycle 2 J VH :: 52 knots Cycle J, VH :: SO knots Cycle 4. VH :: 49 knot.s
DO 0
.2 0 o 0 0 0 00 6>0 o Cb 000 o o 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
000
~ c .2 .4 .6 .2 .4 .2 .4 .6 .2 .4 .6
t
~
~ .4 Cycle S. vH :: 41 knot., C7cl. 6, V H :: 45 knots Cycli!! 7. vH :: 43 knots
~
.E
.21-~0 o O ~ <:b : 0 J 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 08 B CCF l4.D
o o
o 0
o
.2 .4 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 .2 .4 .6
(b) Run 2. I
.4 r "A" Cycle I, VH :: 81., knot.s Cycle 2, V H :: 62 knots
~~~."-"
,>~
o
Spin-down
0 o B °co ao o 0 o o Spin-up
0 0 0 o [j ""'0 DO
0
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 .2 .4 .6 .2 .4
' Cycle 4, ~ VH :: 79 knots [ Cycle \ 6 i, , 1 V > H = 7 . 6 k ~ not .s I ~ Cycle e 7 : . rl V J H O :: ~ 74 0 0 kn 0 o t.s [ Cycle , 6 a , V H g :: 13 8 kno a ts
.2 .4 .2 .4 .2 .4 .2 .4 .6
SUp rat.io, III
(c ) Run 3.
Figure 56.- Concluded.
L
-~,,- ---- - "- --_._---- --------~---- ---- ----'



=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
1
~
"A"
.4 r ~I Cycle 1, V H = 51 knots r Cycle 2 J VH = 49 knots r Cycle 3, VH = 1&8 knots
0
0 000
0 0
.2 I- ~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 r~O
0 0 0 0 O~ 0 0 0 00 0
0 0
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 0 .2 .4 .6
.4 r Cycle L, IIH = ta6 knots r Cycle 5, v H = 45 knots r Cycle 6, V H = La) knots
."
~c
l
.~u..
.2~ 0 <@ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~ <n:P0 O0 ~ 0 0 Q:) fc~no~ 00 C6
c
0
~
E
~0
0 .2 .4 .6 0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4 .6
.4 Cycle 7, VH = L2 knot.s Cycle 6, VH = 41 knots
o 0 00 o
.2 r O@::;C0o (jJ % 0 0 0 0 00 o Spin-down
o Spin-up
o
o .2 .4 .6 .S 1.0 .2 .4
Slip ratio, 31
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 57.- Tire D5Ml, dimple fabric- reinforced tread modified by buf fing the tire to remove the
I-' dimples . Antiskid unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d l = 0 to 0. 3 inch (except wher e noted);
\)l
I-' PB,l = 50 lb/ sq in.



=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
.......
\>I
I\)
.1. r "A" Cycle 1, V H 87 knots Cycle 2, VH 86 knots Cycle 3, VH 81. knots
0
Eg& o
o
I-
.2
01 o DOD o o ~ 8 o
0 o 0 0 0 o 0r::teJ 0 ~
"- 0 .2 .1. .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .1. .6 o .2
.;
c
.. . .U ~ " ~ .. o
.... Spin-do,,"
u0~ o
Spin-up
c
0
.+.~.'
U
.~
c.. .1. Cycle I., V H 82 knots Cycle 5, vH = 81 knots Cycle 6, v H = 79 knots Cycle 7, VH 78 knots
.2
We~ °Cb Cb:P § £ IQl cg) ~&O ~ ~ ~ O Q )D GJO
0 0
I
o .2 .1. 0 .2 .L 0 .2 .1. o .2 .1. .6
Slip ratio, 51
(b ) Run 2.
Figure 57.- Concluded .
--
._ --
-----~------



=== PDF PAGE 136 ===
1- ---.--- -~ -.. ...... ~~-~-- ----v
,",-- Cycle 1, VH = 61 knots ~o ,~;. '. ' •• " ,." .. :ycle ), 'H = 52 knots
c "l 0 0 00 0
' '. . u . . ~" ". . . . .2 (h ~~ 0 0 Cb 0 8 <0 o 0()J 0 0 0 0 ~ c900 c§J 000 0
u0~
c
~
"
.~..... ~
0 .2 I .4 I .6 I .e I 0 .2 I .4 I .6 I 0 .2 .4 .6
(a ) Run 1 .
, : , I - . . 41 Cycle 1, V H = 89 knots I Cycle 2, VH = 87 knots I Cycle ), VH = 35 knots Cycle LJ VH = 8) knots Cycle 5, V H ;;: 78 knots
.. c !l r
. . ~. . . . . . 'l~OJO~ IO~ gbO~ t~ ~D8 ~ ~ ')"
'J O~
u0~
c
' " "0 "
.~
ct
0 0 .2 .4 0 ,2 .4
(b ) Run 2.
, " ,- - ,4r Cycle 1, VH ;;: 10) knots Cycle 2 J VH ;;: 100 knots Cycle ) , V H = 97 knots
c
'u ~" ! o
'. . u0 . . ~ ". . . . OD'd o C OO 0 0 0 ( 0 ; 00~ o S S p p i i n n - - u d p o wn
c 0 0 0 0
~ 0
~
...... 0
0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4
Slip ratio, 31
(C) Run 3·
f-J
\..>I Figure 58.- Tire D6Ml, dimple fabric-reinforced tread modified by 5 circumferential grooves .
\..>I
Antiskid unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
l



=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
I
V ~ f- I ' .4 r 000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 08 ~o 0 cP 0 0 0 0 0 00 0
0
.2
Cycle 1, VH = 26 knots Cycle 5, vH = 25 knots
I
0
o
Spin-dovn
o
Spin-up
.4 f
"-
. c , DO 0 0 0 0 en <tJO
. . . . . . " u . . . . . . 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 00 0 0
....
" .2
u0
.. c 0.,. . Cycle 9 J V H = 23 knots ~:vcle 1), Vii = 21 kr.ots
...~.
"
0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 l.0
.4 r 0iQ) 0 0 0
0 0 o ©
0
, ~
Cvcle 1'(, VH = 19 knots
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, ::11
(a) Run 1.
Figure 59.- Tire DTM1, dimple fabric-reinforced tread modified by 37 lateral grooves. Antiskid
unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
~-.------- - /'



=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
'1
r-.------------------......... ~ ..- -- --~-~-- ,~------- ------' ------ - - -
I
.
[
~~l,~=~~~ Cycle L, VH 5) knots Cycle 7, VH 51 knots Cycle 10, VH 50 knots
~ ~~ ~ ~u c 2 ~ ~ .? 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~ o o o o 8 o 80 0 8@ © Oo0cf)0 B °0
c o o
~
~ o
H
~ 0 .2 .L .6 o .2 .L .6 o .• 2 .L o .2 .1,
(b) Run 2.
I
Cycle 1, VH :::: 72 knot.s r Cycle 2, VH = 71 knots Cycle ), V H = 70 knots Cycle L. VH = 69 knots
.L
:1
.;
c•
. ' ' . - - . 0~ u < < . ~ . +% o l 0 c:P 000 0 r .Qd0 DO 0 0 0 0 . o 0 § 9 0 J @ DB 0 ~ COD 0 00 DO o o S Sp p i i . n , - - u d p o wn
c 0
j 0 :0
.~
;!;
0
(c) Run 3.
.L Cycle 1, VH = 98 knots . Cycle 2, VH = 95 knots Cycle ), V H = 9L knots Cycle L, VH = 93 knots C\"cle S, VH =. 92 knots
..
'
c
!:
~
" " . 0u ~ c. .2 ~EbQ:@ ~ o c PcP>~ a C o O ~M Se~O
~
~
H
~ 0 .2 .L o .2 .L o .2 .L o .2 .L o .2 .L
Slip ra tio, 51
(d) Run 4.
~ ~ Figure 59.- Concluded.
\J1



=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
t: .4 r Cycle 1, VH = 47 knots Cycle 2, VH = L6 knots
O«ilO
0\ 0
0 0 o
0
0 0 00 0 0 o
.2 t- 0 0 0 0 o o o
EID
o
o
Spin-down
o
Spin-up
.4 r- Cycle 3, VH = 45 knots Cycle 4, VH = 44 knots
'"
.,
c 0 0 o
.. . ! ~ ..:,,l , ~ 00 0 0 [j) a 0 0 o 0 c
" 0
u0
c
0
'j
.u...
,t
0 o .2 .4 .6 .e
.4 Cycle 5, v H = 43 knots
[l)
§
dJ o
o
.2 o
00
o .2 .4 .6 .e 1.C
Slip ra tio, sl
(a) Run 1.
Figure 60.- Tire DBMl, dimple fabric-reinforced tread modified by 2 zigzag circumferential
grooves . Antiskid unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
l
"-- --------- ---"



=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
-- --- Y.
I
i Cycle 1, V H = 7L knots I Cycle 2, V H = 73 knots r Cycle 3, VH 72 knots Cycle 0, VH 71 knots
.,r
.L
... I r
QJ
" o °0 °
~ '2l dl 0 0 § °0° ° °0 ° @ c9
i 0 00 °
8
." "..
r"x.
0 .2 .4 0 .2 .l! o .2 .L o .2 .L
(b) Run 2.
Cycle 1, VH = 9L knots Cycle 2, VH 92 knots Cycle 3, VH = 91 knots Cycle L, VH = 90 knots
o 0 g
.2 ~CffCn c9 ~ 0 0 0 ° 2J O ° ~ fu
'~-D
:1 Qj d'8,
~'
. . . Q ". . . . . .J o . I 2 .l! .6 o .2 .L o .2 o .2
...
oQJ
"
.c o..
t.. . Cycle 5, VH = 89 knots Cycl
r
e 6,
:
VH
:
= 67 knots
"
rx. .2 °
0Cb08
o .2 .L o .2
Slip ratio, sl
(c) Run 3.
I--' Figure 60.- Concludea .
\..N
-..J



=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
r
\ ~ )J .L Cycle 1, V H = 56 knots Cycle 2, VH = 5L knots Cycle 3, VH = 5L knot'
OJ
.2 I r ~ C Oo 00 o o 0 o % 0 CO 0 0 o o 0 o o Cb o o 0
000
f o
o .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .4 .6 .8 o .2 .L .6
.4 r Cycle 4, v H = 53 knots r Cycle 5, vH = 53 knots r Cycle 6, VH = 52 knots
"-
..;
c l
.". " .. 8 " " " " ".... ., ~ o < 0 b fl <g 0 0 r~ b 0 0 CIJ 0 eOO 0 0 C 0
..c 0,,.,
.". ,
.
.
.
,
r.. 0 .2 .4 .6 0 .2 .L .6 .8 0 .2 .L .6 .8
.4 Cycle 7, VH = 51 knots
o
Spin-down
o
00 Spin-up
.2 1-0 § <TIl o
00
o
8
o .2 .4 .6 .s 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a ) Run 1.
Figur e 61. - Tire DBM2, tire DBM1 modified by removing rib between the 2 zi gzag grooves . Ant i skid
unit operating; p = 260 1b/ sq in.; d = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
1
L
----.----~------------ --~---..,--<-. -~~----- ____ - -II.



=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
-'"'
I-~--~ - I
I
I
r
• 4 Cycle 1, VH = 78 knot • Cycle 2, VH 76 knot. Cycle 3, V H = 76 knot. Cycle 4, VH 75 knot,
.2 rOO 0
eO[§) 0 0 0 @ 0 D 0 o ° D O 0D 0 O 0 00 -z) ro °
.. : . 1 ,' 0 .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 o .2 .4 o .2 .4
<:
.~
...~..
....
CI>
8
·..
"o
r.,i
.~
r!: .4 Cycle 5, VH 75 knot. Cycle 6, V H 73 knots Cycle 7, VH 72 knots
o
.2 ° ° Spin-down
~OcD 0 00 0 ~ go o o Spin-up
1
o .2 .4 o .2 .4 0 .2 .4
Slip ratio, '1
(b) Run 2.
Figure 61.- Concluded.
~
\0



=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
gf--'
·~ r c9 Cycle 1, V H • 23 knots 00 Cycle 2, V H • 22 knots
0
en 0 0 .0 00 0 0
0 0 o Spin-down 0 0 0 c9
0 o
t Spin-up 0
a .
. .
~
o 0 0 0 Cycle 5, VH • 21 knots ~ Cycle 6, v H • 21 knots
0 0 Ooe 0 0
0 0 00 0 §
.2 [0 0 0 0
.",'-
~ 0
1.
.
. .1.
.
'OJ
g 100 Cycle 8, V • 20 knots Cycle 11, V • 19 knots
.c.. H H
0
. t t. : . 0 0 0 0 0°
0 [jJ ~ 0 0 0 0
0 0 0
$
0
.L r 0
Cycle lL, V • 18 knots 0 Cycle 16, V - 17 knots
0 0 H III 0 H
.2 1- 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 g 0 0 0 o 0
J
0
t
a .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 81
(a ) Run l j P = 260 lb/ sq in.
o
Figure 62.- Tire 81) smooth) all- rubber tread. Antiskid operatipgj d l t o 0.3 inch.
----~_..._z..__~ ___ .



=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
~ _ _____• __~ -~ .. "__.i-- - •• ¥_.-.-_ .. - -~YI
\
.2 fJ
0 0 C ° ycl ll 1, 0 VH 0 = 56 knC'fS . , ° 0 0 Cyele 2 'e . VH S5 o k not 8 s C Cy b cl c e 9 J , @ VH o • 5lL knots cP C ° yc le D L : . ) VH = D :, C kn '.l
'f ;';.2 .:' -.I, . .2 ./, .6 .? ., .2 ./,
~ ott? o B ° ° 0°0 C o ° 0 °
o
Cycle 6, V H • 52 knots Cycle 7. V H • 52 knots
.2 .b .2 .L .6 .2 .L .6
(b) Run 2'"; p 260 lb/sq in.
.2 0 ° 0 o C yc 0 l e 1, V ° o I{ • 66 o k n Q ot. J s 0 o E C © C i y cle 2 0 V ° . 7'no,", ~Jl C y d cle ' J • . B V ~ - " '~" ~ Cycle ~ L. V -
C : "'":"
.2 ..... .L .6 .2 .L .2 .L .2 .L
'~~'~'~' " fg~·~·~··-" ~ e-m "','" .~" ~~~,~ ." ~'
<ru e
§ 0
-, , , ,
I
(c) Run 3; p = 260 lb/sq in.
I
loo C ycle 1 V • 89 knot.3 Cycle 2, V • 61 knot.s Cycle ), Vii • 66 knot.s to ..
~~DO. ~00~8 ~o~ ;'~:~ "~" I
, ncB ,
. .2 .L .2 .L
2 Cycle 5. V • 84 knots Cycle 6, V • 62 knots \
ba~~~
tb
~o%o~o~ o
Spin-down
, o Spin-up
.2 .I, .2 ./,
SHp ratio, -I
(d) Run 4; p = 260 lb/sq in.
f-J
-
f-
F
J
" Figure 62.- Continued.
_J
--------------------



=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
I-'
I
+
\
"
)
" .4i Cycle 2, VH :: 26 knots Cycle L, VH :: 25 knots
0 0 0 0 0 DO 00 0
.21- 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o Spin-down 0 0 0 0
0 Spin-up
O·
.4,.... 0 Cycle 6, VH :: 25 knots r Cycle 8, VH = 2L knot.s
00
0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
D
.2'
i
~.
........ 0
8
c 'T Cycle 12, VH = 2) knots fo Cycle 16, VH :: 22 knots
~ ~o
.".. 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
0 D 0 0 D D
0
0
I~ I
0
.4,.... Cycle 11, 1H :: 21 knot.s r Cycle 19, VH :: 20 knot.s
0 0 0
00
0 0 0 0 0
.2f-- 0 0 0 0 0 ~:o 0 0
(]I
0
I
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, lSI
,
(e) Run l' P = 120 1b/sq in.
Figure 62.- Continued.
_ -_ _ _ ---A



=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
-'- 1
_______~ -...• - --- _ _ __ __ --..,.,---- I ~ ...... -- .. ---~ ----- .---
I
b
, '~'l9 dO ~'~~~:'~' • (IlD Cy O cle ) ~ , V H :: ° 51 knot,s roOCy ° c le < 6 tJ , vI ° I : : L 0 9 0 k not.s ~ 9,0 C yccleP 1°, V~ --.9 kn oto
." ."
~ .2 .L .6 .2 .6 .2
~ :;':;" .. .. °
'~ ;~" '""~.' ~ ~ !Jl U
08°00 0 0 ~O
~
Cycle 11, VH : 47 knots
. ! 2 .I" .2 ." I
(f) Run 2; P = 120 1b/sq in.
I
Cycle 2 V Cycle J. VH :: 6S knots Ecy"• •. V H -- "I1 4.L knoUi
'F~~'~~-~ [£f ",:~:~" cw
~o ~ 000 I
..
'i ,," ..', . . ,." ., ."
.2 . h .6 .? .2 .L
~ Cycle 6 V Cyde 7, VII :;: 62 knots Cycle 9. VH :: 61 knots I
° ° ~e&o,E"=~" k;~,~'~~" ~ 8 °
OOIlD 00 r§)0 00 rID 00 0° °
I
.2 .L .2 .1: .2 .L .2 .J,
I
- (g) Run 3; p = 120 1b/sq in.
' ~:~'o:' ~ o ""~'~~"~:
Cycle J. VH:;: 78
~
k not.
[ ° °o°cRJ 0'
o
., Spin-dcnm
.2 .1: .:: .L .6 .2 .6 o Spin-up
.2 Cycle L, VH :: 71 lmot.a Cyele 5. VH :: 75 knoU
[ 000000 Il1)IOC(p [ 0[))00 0 000c:P1Q)
.2 .L .6 .! .2 .L .~ .8
Slip roaUo, 51
(h) Run 4; p = 120 1b/sq in.
~ Figure 62. - Continued.
VI
I
---- _._--



=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
f-'
+=
+=-
,-_________v ij = 93 knots
.,' I
H
:i
I V = 91 kn;::le 1, V = 90 knots
H
.~ =
l'T Cycler 2, V 88 knots
H
I CYcle knots
H
3. V = 87
I ~o OO~
$ oS
000 OOr.§D 00 00
00
t ~
I I I
'' ~ ''; 0 . 2 .~ .6 .8 1.0
J'r.<
Slip ratio, sl
(i) Run 4; P 120 Ib/sq in.
Figure 62.- Concluded.
~-------------~ --__~ ..O-<.-___~ __ ______ ____ _____ _ ____ .• __ _ __ -------._---



=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
---------- -- - Yj
I ----~------
I
.4 Cycle 1, V H = 62 knots Cycle J, VH 59 knots Cycle 5, V H = 5tl knots
0 8
o
.2 l-- 00 C Cb 0 (l#
0 0 00 OQ) ~o
c9
~
I
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 o .2 .4 o .2 .4
:i.
+r:'
.."..
o
.... . o.. ... Spin-down
o
o" Srin-up
o
r:
..o..
+o'
r . . ~ . • 4 r Cycle 7, vH 57 knots Cycle 9, V H 56 knots Cycle 11, V H 54 knots
CO
.2 c§) ~ § 0 O© 0 0
00 00
o .2 .4 o .2 .4 o .2 .4
Slir ratio, sl
Figure 63.- Tire 8lMl, tire 81 modified by 1/2-inch-wide circumferential groove. Run 1; antiskid
unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0.3 inch .
1
......
+
\Jl
I
L_



=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
t: .J.. Cycle 1, V H 71 knots Cycle 2, V H 70 knots Cycle :>, VH 69 knots
0\
.2 f-
000 0 0 0 I() iro 0 0 0 0 0 0 o noCb 0 o
0
0 00
0 .2 ./' .6
o
Spin-doyn
o
Spin-up
.0 r Cycle /" V H = 69 knots Cycle 5, VH = 68 knots Cycle 6, \ = 66 knots
"-
+'
C
"
."~
. ...
.
. .~.
.
c
o"
"
.2
~[!l)00 o I]J) r§> o ~g cP 0 0
o
+.~'
.
".~..
r~
o
.L Cycle 7, VH = 66 knots Cycle 8, V H 65 knots Cycle 9, VH 6/' knots
8
.2 c5D o m o Cb ° eo ctJ o § o 0 0 o
o
o .2 .L o .2 .0 o .2 .L
Slip ratio, 51
Figure 64. - Tire S1M2, tire Sl modified by 3/4- inch- wide circumferential groove. Run 1; anti
skid unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in. ; dl = 0 t o 0. 3 inch.
'---. - -
.-------.~---~------ '
..



=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
.4 Cycle 1, V H = 78 knots Cycle 2, VH = 77 knots Cycle ), VH 76 knots
• 2 ° o C fJ Ql 0 o o o <[j o Dr. co o
o OJ 0
On
o .2 .4 .1) o .2
.4 r Cycle 5, VH = 74 knots r Cycle 6, VH = 7) knots r C:rcle 7, V H = 73 knots
'"
.;
c .,t il
"
·rl
' ' ~ - - u0 " < < °0 OJ CO la°'iJ o loo@ [!j) °
c
0
j
u
.'J..:
0 0 .2 .4 0 .2 .4
!
Cycle 9, VH 71 knots
.4
o
Spin-down
o
o Spin-up
.2 Ot3 <0 0
o .2 .4
Slip ratio, 51
Figure 65.- Tire 81M3, tire 81M2 modified by adding two 3/8- inch-wide circumferent ial grooves .
I-'
.. - ... F ;J ' Run 1; antiskid unit operating; p = 260 1b/ sq in.; d l = 0 t o 0. 3 inch .



=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
.4 Cycle 1, V = 79 knots Cycle 2, V = 78 knots Cycle ), V = 76 knots
H H H
o
o
(]> 00
.2 o
8
")
o
.4 Cycle 5, V = 74 knots Cycle 6, V = 74 knots Cycle 8, V = 72 knots
H H H
:!.
.2
°
o .2 .4 o .2 .4 o .2 .4
.4 Cycle 9, V = 71 knots
H
0
0 0 Spin-down
0°0
.2
0 0 Spin-up
0
o .2
Slip ratio, sl
Figure 66.- Tire 81M3. Run lj antiskid unit operatingj p = 260 lb/sq in.
For this run, the wet runway was broomed free of water, that is, the
o.
runway was l eft damp with no standing puddles of water; d
l ~
148



=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
._ ............." .......... _ ..... ______
_u.~,
~ Cycle 1, V
H
::: 19 knots Cycle 4, vH ::: 18 knots
.6
o 0 o
.4 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 8 o o o o 0 o
o
'liO o
Spin-down
o
o
Spin-up
.6
Cycle 7, '.[ H = 16 knots Cycle 13, VH ::: lL knots
"
i
o 0
.4
~ o o
o
g c o o o o DO ~ o o o o o
~
~ .2 o
.::
o
o
.6
Cycle 19, VH ::: 11 knot:s Cycle 25, 'v H ::: 6 knots
cP o
.4 o o
~ Q 0 o o o o o
o o o o o
.2 o
o
o .2 .4 .6 .S 1.0 o .2 .4 .6 .8 LO
Slip ratio, '1
(a ) Run 1; p = 260 1b/ sq in.
Figure 67.- Tire 82, smooth fabric- reinforced tread, rubber surface . Antiskid unit operating;
+ f- ' d 1 = 0 to 0.) inch.
\D
l ____



=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
g .
I-' Cycle 1, VH = 74 knots
~ ~;;" ~; ~
~ '~ O '0 0° '. ',' • " .." • 'P M"
. °D @ D0 D °
DO
o
!
o .2 .4 .6
t'
~ § ~ 0,., ••. •~ • n ,"," ~ 8 ", ::;. •~ . n 'M" ~ 0,"" .._ ~ H • ~ '''','
~c}) 0 0
a
~ 0
.t Lr ""'M"
, ~OOb ~:" ,. '~ • " .." . 4ll ~ cP ~CleG. v, - o Spin-down
U Spin-up
o
(b ) Run 2j p 260 l b/ sq i n.
"."
. ., ~ 08 O~~; 'M"
r&oCy c!.o 2, VH = B7 knots
{~:: ~ ':~
% '"'''
I t
+'
~
0
...
'j0; .,
a 0°:: ,." . " .. ,"
~ oQ:] 'C 0"" '" " • " '"''' ~<1ll ° 0 f~ " ~:~"'''
o .2 .4 o .2 .4 o .2 .4
Slip ratio, 81
(c ) Run 3j P = 260 lb/ sq i n.
Figure 67. - Continued.
l-. __ _________________ ___ ____ ____ ._ _____
....,.......~___ _~ ~ ~



=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
I-'
\J1
I-'
~ ____ ~ . - . - - - r - '
- -------------
... ._ __ - .------~
.L o o 0 0 0 o o Cycle 1, o V H o = 25 kno o ts o o o 0 0 0 o o Cycle 5 0 , 0 v H = 2) k o n ots o
.2 f- 0
o
o
o
Spin-down
o
Spin-up
.L Cycle 9, VH = 21 knots Cycle 12, VH = 20 knots
"
1 I O @ 0 0 o o
;::; 0 0 00 0 0 o o o o 0 o o o 0
~ .2
g o
. ,co, , ., o
1."..!
o
.L r Cycle 16, VH = 19 knots I 0 Cycle 18, V H = 18 knots
0
0 0 0 0 0 @ 0 0 0 0 o o
0 D O DO
.2 f- 0
0
0
J..
0
0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, sl
(d) Run 1; P = 120 1b/sq in.
Figure 67.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
f-'
\ f J \) l '[ Cycle 1, V H = 50 knots Cycle ), VH = 50 knots Cycle 5, vH = L9 knots
.2 ~O 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 o o [] o <0 000 o
0
R:l
J
0 .2 .L .6 .8 o .2 .L
." r Cycle 6, VH = 49 knots Cycle 8'''H = 48 knots Cycle 9, V H = L8 knots
"-
.,'
c
..~.. r
.!.l. o
.. u0~ .. .2 8 0 ~ 8 0
o
0 0 CD o ° SO o On 0
c
'0j
..u.....
c.. 0 o .2 .4
. " Cycle 12, VH = 47 knot • Cycle 1), VH = 46 knots
o
o 0 0 0 Spin-down
.2 o 0 o o rJ Spin-up
~o 0 0 0
0 .2 .L .6 0 .2 .4 .6
Slip ratio, 31
(e ) Run 2; p = 120 1b/sq in.
Figure 67.- Continued.
---------_.-
~~ ~-----------~-- ._-



=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
......
\Jl
\.>I
_ ~
___
~ ~ v " ' ~ ~
____ --- ---.------.- -- .~ __ _ ._ _ ---.r --_ ... -. ~-~ " ..... ----
..
,' [o>d%, :"o'·~~" .~" Cycle 2, V H = 71 knots [;~' '''.~'' ~~";~ ~ ~"
"
8 ~'" ' '
all ,0 (30 ,
~ 0 .2 .L .6 0 .2 .~ 0 .2 .~ 0 .2 .h
!:
.~..
'OJ
o
u
...
Cycle 7, V = 68 knots
~ ~ ~ ~~';~." ' ~" H [ 8 ";.~ " ," •• ~"
., @: : : ' " ,''" ~
CD 0
0 .2 .L 0 .2 .h 0 .2 .h 0 .2 .~
(f ) Run 3; p 120 lb/ sq in.
. : . 1 .h Cycle 1, VH = 92 knots
IC ycle 2, VH = 91 knots o
S ! " u : l I CycleI ), V H = C y 8 c 8 lI e k n ~ o , ts V H = 86 knots o S Sp p i i n n - -d u o p w n
8 ,,,'d. " " ...."
.2
.~,
cb€ °8
E 10 0 ~ 0 ~ C(00<0
o .2 .h .6 .e 1.0
Slip ratio, "1
(g) Run 4; p = 120 lb/sq in.
Figure 67.- Concluded .



=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
I-' ·6
V += l - Cycle 1, VH :: 27 knots Cycle 4, vH :: 2S knots
o
0
.4 I- 0 0 0 o o o o o S S p p i i n n- - d u o p w n 00 0 o o o
o
0 o 08 o o B
.2 1
o
0 o
0
0
I
0
.6
Cycle B, VH ::: 2) knot.s Cycle lL, VH :: 20 knot.s
~
.
., 0
c "~ ~ 0 If
~ ~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
0 0 0
c .2 00 0 0 0
.!l
~ 0
t:
0
.6
Cycle 19, VH :: 18 knot.s Cycle 20, V H :: 17 knots
0 0 00 0
.d- o
0 0 0 0 0 0 o o o o o
0 0 o
o
.2
o
o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 .2 .L .6 .f 1.0
Slip ratto, 51
(a) Run 1.
Figure 68.- Tire 82Ml, tire 82 modified by adding 4 circumferential grooves . Antiskid unit oper-
atingj p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
l
-----------------,--
------ ---
~--- --~.-



=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
-_._-- I
Cycle 2, V = 1.9 knots Cycle 5, V = 1.7 knots
.1. 8&0 H H
@ 00
o
o o 0 0
o 0
.2 o o o o o Spin-down o o o 0 o
Spin-up
o
.1. Cycle 6, V H = uS knots Cycle 7, V H = 1.7 knots
:1
.., o o
' '' '- - a M M " o " " < < .2 JP o 0 o o o o o o 0 o o o <0 o
o
.
.
"a.
.
.
,
.:1
t!:
o
.1. r Cycle 8, V H = uS knots r: Cycle 9, V H = 1.3 knots
0 0 ° 0° 0
0 0 0 0 0
0
0 0 0 0 0
.2 I- 0 0
0 0
1
0
o .2 .1. .6 .8 loG o .2 .L .6 .8 I.e
Slip ratio, 51
(b ) R1lll 2.
t; Figure 68. - Conti nued.
\J1
-- _._-



=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
·L Cycle 1, VH :::: 78 knots Cycle 3 J YH ::: 76 knots Cycle 4, V H ::: 16 knot.s
.2 o o o o (0 c 1 O o o 0 0 0 o o 0
o
o
.2 .L .6 .8 .2 .L .6
co Cycle 5, vH = 73 knots Cycle 6, V H ::: 73 knots Cycle 1 J VH ::: 71 knots ~~ Cycle ij, VH ::: 11 knots
I ~u :. .2 o o 0 @ o I <tf 00 OQ) ° 8 CtJ ° DO
0
~
I
.2 .L .2 .L .2 .2 .L .6
(c ) Run 3 .
•L
Cycle I, VH ::: 96 knots Cycle 2, V H ::: 9) knots Cycle J, VH ::: 92 k-m't.s
00 o o
.2 Cb oJ cPO o 0 0 0 o ° ~~D
.
0
~c 0 o Spin-down
u 0 o
t~ Spin-up
8
~ .L
.~. Cycle L, V H ::: 90 knots Cycle $. VA ::: 89 knots Cycle 6, vH :::: 67 knots
OQ:JQ) o °10 0 °
.2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cb cP °
.2 .L .6 .2 .L o .2 .L
Slip ratio, 51
(d) Run 4.
Figure 68. - Concluded.
156



=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
----l
------ ----
r~~
.6
I
Cycle 2, VH ::: )2 knots Cycle ), VH ::: )2 knots
r- ~G
.L 0 0
0 0 o 0
0 Spin-down 0
.2 [j) 0 0 0 o Spin-up I 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~ 0
0
.6
I
Cycle 5, YH ::: )0 knots Cycle 6, V H ::: )0 knots
0
.~:": :
.~. ' ~ 0
0 0 0
0 0
0
0 0
~ " 8 .2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ~ 0 0 00
t: 0
0
0 0
L..
0
.6
I
Cycle 7, VH ;: 29 knots Cycle 6, V H ::: ?6 knot.s
.L f- 0 0 0 0 0 o 0
CD 0 <tJ 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 8 0 0 0
.2 f-- 0
0
T
---~
.2 .L _6 .8 I.e 0 .2 .L .6 .8 I.e
Slip ratio, 51
(a) Run 1; P = 260 lb/sq in.
Figure 69.- Tire 82M2, tire 82Ml modified by adding 1 narrow circumferential groove at center
line . Antiskid unit operating; d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
l
I-'
\Jl
-..J



=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
--.--- -.- - ---
.U Cycle 1, VH ::: 61 knots Cycle 2, VH ::: 59 knots Cycle 3, VH = 58 knots
~
\ O Jl J 0o o 0 Cb 00 8 o 00 D 0 O 0 00 o o o co D 0 O B o o o o o
.2 o 0 o
o 0 o
o
~c
.~..
iil
0
8
.U 0 Cycle 4, v H = 56 knots
E 0 0 ° 0 aD o
o
.2 a 6l o a o Spin-dOV'n
Spin-up
(b) Run 2; P 260 l b/ sq in.
.U r a 0 Cycle 1, V H :: 69 knots r Cycle 2 J VH :: 69 knots Cycle ), VH = 68 knots
0 l
.2 f- 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 OJ 0 e 0 nD 0 00 00 ° 0 D a f:o°'6 CO DO a
0 f
a
.2 .U .6 .6 1.0 .2 .U .6 .2 .U .6
.U r
nO
Cycle L, VH = 61 knots t
~ ooo
Cycle 5, VH = 66 knots
0 c 0
COO 0 0 0
.2 f- 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a
0
0
.2 .L .6 .6 .2 .L .6 .6
Slip ra tic, 61
(c ) Run 3; p = 260 l b/ sq i n.
Figure 69.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
- ---_.
r-- -- --- - ----------'~--. ~
-----.--~-
I I
.L r Cycle 1, V H ;;: 71 knots ;cle 2, VH = 69 knots o Cycle ), V H = 68 knots
°
0 000 0 Gl cP 0 0 l 00 B o o
o
.2 I- 0 0 0 00 0 0
~
~ .,I
t: 0 .2 .L .6.6 .2 .2 .L .6 .6
ca ~ I Cycle L, VH = 67 knot. C;'~ 5'oV~ = 66 knots h:c~e86, ~ = 6L knots ~ 00 0 ° Cycle 7, vH = 6) knots
E ~ OJ (j] 0 °
o 0 0 0 0
.2 ~ ° 0 0° DO
I~ o
o
0
0 .2 .L .2 .L 0 .2.L .2 .L .6
(d) Run 4; p = 260 lb/sq in .
•L Cycle 1, VA ;: 93 knots Cycle 2, VH ::: 91 knots Cycle ), VH = 69 knot.s
00
~ 0 8 o o 0 DO oOCb 0 0 0 o Sptn-dolm
o o o
Spin-up
.
~c
u
.: 0 .2 .L .6 .6 .2 .2 .L
~
~ .L Cycle L, V H = 68 knots Cycle 5, v H = 82 knot.s Cycle 6, VH ::: 86 knots Cycle 7, VH :: 85 knots
..: rPCb
E o i o <ill o 0 0 0
~o o 8
.2
0 0 ~ o
10
.2 .L o .2 .2 .L .2 .L .6
Slip ratio, 81
(e) Run 5; p = 260 lb/sq in.
i-'
\ \ J 0 l Figure 69.- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
3 ~ ' .6 I Cycle I, VH :: )6 knots l Cycle 2, V
H
:: 37 knots
.L f- 0 0 0 0 o Spin-down 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 o Spin-up 0 0 0 0 0 0
'{ 0 0 r 00 0 0 0
0
.6
Cycle ), V H :: )6 knot.s Cycle l.i., Vii = 35 knots
"-
~c .L 0 0 00 0 0 0
l ~ 0 m 0 0 0 0 l~ 0 0 00 0 0 0
.2 0 0 0
c
~ 0
r!: 0
0 .2 .L .6 .6 1.0
.6 r
Cvcle 5, v :: JL knots
H
0 0
.L f- 0 0 0
0
0 0 0
~ 0
.2 , 0
0
.2 .L .6 .6 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
,
(f) Run 1· P = 120 1b/sq in.
Figure 69.- Continued.
._--
~ ~--.---.--...------~-- ._---



=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
------ --- I
1'-- ----- -----
--
.4 Cycle 1, V H = 58 knots Cycle 2, VH = 56 knots ~ycle ), VH = 55 knots
. , .! " ~ . :. ; - 0 0 OD 0 D 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DO 0 0 00 0 0 0 o i 0 J 0 0 0 0 0
~ .2 0 0
8~ 0
00 0
S~
~....
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
(g) Run 2; p 120 lb/SCl in.
.4
Cycle 1, VH 79 knots Cycle 2, V H 78 knots Cycle ), VH 76 knots
o
.2 O~uCb & o o ro 0 o 0 J< ,. - n r OD <9 0
BOd
<tJ
"-
"
!~:
. .~.
.
.
.
0 .2 o .2 .4
o~
u
§
.' u.j. .~ Cycle 4, V H 75 knots Cycle S, vH 74 knots
,::
o 00 D O cP O ~O cP~ 0 o Spin-dovn
.2 rO O 0 o o
0 o Spin-up
o
<0
0 .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4
Slip ratio, sl
(h) Run 3; p = 120 lb/SCl in.
~
I-' Figure 69.- Concluded.



=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
I
0 f ~ \) \ .L r Cycle 1, V H = 27 knots C\'c)e 2, V H = 27 knots
0 0 0 0 0 ~f 0 0 0 0
.2 h 0 0 0 0 0 o o Spin-down 0 0 0
0 Spin-up
0
.L r 0 Cycle ) J VH = 21 knots [000 Cycle 5J VH = 25 knots
0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0
.2 1@ 0 0 0 0 0
"-
.,
c
.:l
S
8 0 r
c .L © Cycle 6, V H = 25 knots [0 0 Cycle 7, V H = 2L knots
~
0 0
J:: 0 cP
'r 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
l:
0
.L r Cycle 9, VH = 20 knots 0 Cycle 10, V = 23 knots
0 0 0 H
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
I 0 0 0 0 0
.2
0
0
.2 .• L .6 .6 l.0 0 .2 .L .6 .6 l.0
Slip ratio, 31
(a) Run 1.
Figure 70.- Tire S), smooth fabric-reinforced tread, fabric surface. Antiskid unit operating;
p = 260 1b/sq in.; d1 = 0 to 0. ) inch.
l_ _
~----- ----.-
---------
-----
.-~--



=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
----- -I
~----------
---~~-~---
.4 Cycle 1, V H • 48 knots Cycle 2 J V H = h6 kn0t.s Cycle 3, VH • 46 knots
o
.21.- o 0 o a 0 CCP o ° o o § o o aD O B o 0 0
0 0
[} o
o .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 .2 .4 .6
.4 Cycle 4, VH • 45 knots Cycle 5, v H = 44 knots Cycle 6, V H = 4L knots
.2 Q] o ° 0 o ° cP ° t [ ~O DO 0 00 0 00 0 D O ° o 0
0
"
.,
c
.~
-t. o :< o r o .2 .4 .6
2~ .4 Cycle 7 J VH ... 43 knots Cycle B, VH = 43 knots
c
~
o
.::: .2 I- O 0 J 0 o ° 0 0 0 0 o o 0 0 0 ° o ° o
o
Spin down
o .2 .4 .6 .8 o .2 .4 .6 o
Spin-up
.4 - Cycle 9, v = 42 knots
H
jccoo
'b
0 0 0 0
~
o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 91
(b) Run 2.
~
'->l Figure 70.- Continued.
~-~---



=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
~
+=- .L Cycle I, VH ;:: 78 knots Cycle 2, VH -:: 77 knot.s Cycle J, VH = 16 knot.s Cycle h, V H ::: 7L knots
.2
1m
0 0 cP o 10 ° 0 DO I~~ 0°8 1000 @o cr:o
.2 .L .6 a .2 .L a .2 .L .2 .L
.L I Cycle 5, vH -:: 74 knots Cycle 6, v H ::: 73 knots I Cycle 7, V H ::: 7J knot.s
.2
I 00 co 8 8
L
cr :P 00 I!l 000
IcP
DO
a
(c ) Run 3 .
.,I " ,. '.'. . ,."
,~ Cycle 2, VH ::: 98 knots C~·cle ), VII::: 96 knot.s Cycle h, VH :: 94 knots
.2
o
~' I~O c:8 cO oc9 cjJ ° @ OOO@~ o9lo <tHlD o r:})0 0 rc9
::
~ .2 .L .2 .L .2 .L
~ " .L I Cvcle 5, v -:: 91 knots
H
E
o
Spin-dovn
.2 o
Spin-up
0
(' c colfJo
-----'
.2 .L
Slip rat.io, 51
(d) Run 4.
Figure 70.- Concluded.
L ___ __
~ ~
-.-------~" ~-



=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
1
Figure 71.- Tire S4Ml, smooth fabric-reinforced tread, rubber surface, modified by adding a large
~ diamond pattern. Antiskid unit operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
\J1 l
- - .--.--



=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
r" ""'" , - "
.4 CYcle 1, VH ::: So knots Crell'! 2. VH ::: 49 knots Cycle u, VH :: 48 knot.s
~
0\ o ooJl 00 0 00 o 0 8 o
O§ 0 o goo 0 Cb 0
1.2f- tl) 0 re o 0
.0
OJ
.. .,
I I
.2 .6 .2 .6
~"<",'" -"
Cycle 6, YH :: 46 knot.s
~: : 'Q: '~ .-"
.2 e <OJ ctl 8 0 0 0 E9 0 o o Spin-down
§ Spin-up
o .2 --.4-- .~6 0 .2 .4
(b) Run 2 .
• 4
Cycle I, VH ::: 14 knot.s Cycl. 2, YH = 73 ''''''' Cycle 3. vH ::: 72 knot." Cyc L le L, iH : : 71 knot.s Cyele 5. vH ::: 70 knots Cyc t le 6, V :H ::: 10 knot.s
o DO L
.2 (J] 00 0
[ll)0 0 0 [ fo~O~
o
f
o .2
o o @ 0
°
o
Cyell'! 7, iH ::: 69 knot.s Cycle 8, VN ::: 68 knots
(c ) Run 3.
Cycle
r
J. VH
:
:: 88 k not.s Cycle !.t, VH ::: 87 knob Cycle 6, vH ::: 65 knot.s
r
' u 8 ~. , .2 &<0 0 0 0 ' -b 0 0°8 o 0 :> ~~ &D~ oc9O §
Eoc
~
.c
Cycle I, VH :: 92 knots Cycle 2, YH:: 69 knot.s , .1
'~"" ~ .2 .L .2 .4 o .2 o .2 .2
SUp ratto, II]
(d ) Run 4.
l_,,_ Figure 71.- Concluded.
--- .~~---'--.-..-. ..--- - .. -----



=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
---l
1
Cycle 1, V H = 28 knots o Cycle ) , VH ;;: 2(.. Knot.s
0 00
0 0 0 0 o C o Spin-dovn o o o o o
0 00 C Spin-up o
.0 o
.2
0
.6
Cycle 5, V
H
;;: 25 knots Cycle 7, VH = 2L Imo:s
.".-
0
" .U C 0
~
.~., 0 0 0 ~ 8 00
8~ ~ 0 0 10 0 0 0
~ .2
.;:
0
J:
1 - I
0
,
.6
Cycle 11, VH = 22 knots Cycle 1) J VH = 21 knot.s
0
.L f- 0 0 0 0 0 0 f 0 0 0 0 0°
c9
0 CJ
0 DC
0
.2
o .2 .L .6 .8 l.0 .2 .L .6 .8 l.0
Slip ratio, 91
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 72.- Tire S5Ml , smooth fabric- reinforced tread, rubber surface, modified by adding a small
~
-.J diamond pattern. Antiskid unit operating; p ~ 260 Ib/ sq in.; d l ~ 0 to 0. 3 inch.



=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
0
f-J
\ .~
I Cycle 1, VH ::: 5.3 knots ko Cycle 2, VH ::: 53 knots Cycle .3, VH ::: 52 knot.s
():) CC' 0 0 0 0 § 0 ° 0 00 0 loo 0 0 0 0
5
.2 f- 0
0
.2 .~ .6 .8 .2 .~ .6 .8
'[
0
0 r ~ooo 0 c [0 ° 0 0 C-
o 0 00 0 o 0 &0 8 @ 0
' 2 8 0 0 ~vcle °
8 0
0 CYcle h, Vii ;; 51 !lnots >. v K ' 50 knots CYcle 6, VH ::: L9 knot~ 10 eve] e 7, \ ::: 1.17 knots
('
I
.2 .~ 0 .2 .~ .2 .~ .6 .2 .~ .6
(b) Rllil 2 .
.I. C"cle 1, VH ::: 73 knot.s Cvclo 2, Vb ::: 72 knots CYcle ), VH :: 71 knots Cycle II, V H ::: 70 knot.s
o o
.2 0 00 cP o o @r:P c· Sp1.n-down 1!F ° o° 000
<tJ <2J o L Spl,~up EP o:§'"°
o
oL.........----l, o o
.2 .~ .6 .~
.~
Crcle 5, VH ::: 70 knnts CYcle 6, v H :: 69 knot!' Cycle 7, V~ ::: 66 knots C:vcle B, VH :: 66 knots
<no
d? 8°
.2 CO 00 C b@O 00 Q J @ l lD
@
C
.2 o .2 •1 . o .1• .2
Slit: ratio, 51
(c) Rllil 3.
Figure 72.- Continued.
'--- ---- ----'"'------------ -" ~-~~--~-.--. ------- --



=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
- -----1
.L
Cycle 1, V H • 86 knots Cycle 2, VH ;; 66 knots Cycle 3, V H • 85 knots Cycle L, V H :: 8) knots
.2 00 ~OO
gCJjO 0 CO 0 §~8 0
§ cA§l°0
~
~
~
;:: 0
~
.L
S Cycle 5, vH = 61 knots Cycle 6, VH ;; 80 knot.s
t
~
o
.2 o:rP, n 0 00 COD '2J 0 o Spin-down
DO ,tr° Spin -up
@
(d) Run 4 .
•L
Cycle 1, VH ;; 94 knots Cvcle 2, V
H
= 9) knot.s Cycle ), VH :: 92 knot.s Cycle L, VH = 91 knots
o
o
. .2
§
q pmo 00 0
o
< 2J%0 000 o 0
o
0 0 I2J DO
~c
o
eu
8 0 ~ ______L -___~ o .2 o .2 .1,
~ 04
t Cycle 5, vH = 89 knots Cycle 6, VH • 88 knots
~
..a
.2 ~D OD r:9 o !YO Do
lib
!8'l0
.2 .4 .2 .4
Slip ratio, 51
(e) Run 5.
~
Figure 72.- Concluded.
\0



=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
.6
~ ~ I Cycle 1, V H .: 27 knot.s Cycle 2 J VH = 27 knot.s
0
0
.L t- cPO 0 0
0 o Spin-down 0
.2 e- 0 0 0 o 0 c9 o Spin-up 0 0 0 0 0 0 O 0
.6
C.vcle L, V .: 2S knots C:vcle S, VH .: 2S knots
H
.L o o
00 8 o o o o o
cP o o o o o
o o 0
.2 o 0 0 0
.6
Cycle 7, V
H
= 2) knots C\'cle 8, VH .: 22 Imot.s
0
.4 r
oo <§) 0 0 ~ o
o c
o
o 0 o o o o
o o
.2
C
.2 .L .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .L .6 .C 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 73.- Tire S6Ml, smooth fabric- reinforced tread, rubber surface, modified by adding 7 cir
cumferential grooves (sine-wave cross section) . Antiskid unit operating; p = 260 l b/ sq in.;
l__ _ _ dl = 0 to 0.3 inch.
- ------ --------
----~-~---- ----'



=== PDF PAGE 174 ===
----- --
-~- ~--
.U r 00 0 C 0 y cle 1, VH : 55 knot!!! (.'yele 2. VH = SL knots Cycle .3. VH = 53 knots
0 C
0 0 0
\3 0 < @ lll 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
0 0
..
.2 • U .6 .8 .2 .6 _2 .U .6 .8
-. r
0 Cycle L, VH = 52 knots ~ Cycle S. VH = SO knots
.2f- 0 ~ 0 0 00 ro 0 0 0 0 0 o o S S p p i i n n - - u d p o vn 0000 0 I:b 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
.2 .U .6 .8 1.0 .2 .U .6 .8 1.0
(0 ) Run 2 .
r
. L
O§ C 0 y cle 1, VH = 61 knots ~ :'~'~' ~-. ~ 0 "d." " , WO ... Cycle 6, vH = 16 knots
.21-B 0 o 0 '0' ° o <b0oo
0 o 0 8 o ca O 0 0 0 IDl O 0
0 'J€
0
.2 .U .6 .2 .U
(c) Run 3 .
•U
Cycle 1, VH = 91 knot.s Cycle 2, V H = 95 knots Cvele 3, vH = 9) knots Cycle L, VH = 92 knot.s
0 0 0 a
I@ 0 J & o a o 0 O De 0g? 00 ° c o )J °O 0 0 0 ~ O o ~ o oa 0° 0 0
.. .. ..
• 2 .U .6 .2 • 2 .2 .6
Slip ratio, 51
(d) Run 4 .
.t:l
I-'
Figure 73.- Concluded.



=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
~
- f - \) l .6 o 0 c o Cycle I, VII :: 18 knot3 o C' o Cvclo 6, v H :: lL knot.s
o o c o o o
C'
.4 o o o o
o o Spln-dovn
t:J Spin-up
o
0
.6r OOt') C 0
Cycle 9, VH :: 13 knot:! :::ycle 1), V :: 11 knot.s
"- ·t 0 ~ 0 C 0 0 H C'
f,- 0 0
.!l 0
~ 0 q9
';l
g
c .2
~
.':l
/:.
0 .2 .4 .~ .8 1.0
.6
C ('
Cycle 22, VH :: 7 knots
C 0 0
0
0
00
"r
.2
.2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 74.- Tire Rl, rib all-rubber tread, 9 grooves. Antiskid unit operating; p 260 lb/sq in.;
d = 0 to 0.3 inch.
l
-~-.-~-~--<----- --



=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
.- ---.. - . - ---1
--- - - -- ---- ----
_---.c'~ .... --.----~- .... -- --
.6 r I
Cycle 1, V H :: L7 knot.s Cycle ), V H :: L5 knot.s
0 0
.4 ~ 00 0 ~o c:f0C
0 o 0
r0 0 0 0 o S S p p i i n n - - d u o p w n 0 0 0 [j)
0 Cb 0
I
Cycle 5, vii = L) knots Cvcle 7, VH :: LI knoL
"-
!
~"l
i "t OO~
l:O
0 0 0 0 0
; ; " J l .2 0 0 0 0 o§ ~ 0 121
t:
I
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.C
.6 ,
Cycle 9, VI1 :: Lo knot.s
C§
(;
C' 8
.4 f- a
0 c
0 o B
.2
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ra tio, 51
(b) Run 2.
Figure 74.- Continued.
~
-..:J
VJ



=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
l--'
-.J
+=-
'l
Cycle 1, VH = 67 knots Cyclc ), v H = 6L knot s Cycle 5, V H = 62 knotr
o
0
o
.L 0 0
C' 0 c o o o o %
ClD o o (§)
0 0 o
C' 0° o ('
.2 1 cP
o o
c
0
0
L-
. : , 1 0 .2 .L .6 .B 1.( o .2 .L .6 0 .2 .L .6 .8
c
!
. ..u. .",
, o
Spin-do,,"
c
0u Q ) o
Spin-up
..0",
u
-r<
c~..
.6
C.,cle 6, VI; = 6] k'1ct.::; Cycle 9, \ 59 knots
0°
.L
0 0
C'
o o C'
C' 0 o
.2 c o C' o !IT o o 0 0
o .2 .L .6 .6 o .2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ra tio, 31
(c) Run 3.
Figure 74.- Continued.
L_ ________ _________ ____
~_~_- ._~~
----- ---<''-'-----



=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
----~- ----~ --~~--
~-------.<--
.1. r C Cycle I, Vn - 60 knots Cycle) J VH " 77 knots
rr~ O O
°c of
@ ° 0 0 0 'i?P 0
., I- 0 ° 0
°0 0 °
.,
.? .1, .6 .6 1.0 o .1. .6
.1. Cycle 5, v • 7L knots r
H ° § O cP
cP
ds c
., IcC ° CO 0:; ;VC1.~ 7, V• . = 7':' ""lOts o o Spin-down
§ Spin-up
o
.,
.1. .2 .1.
(d) Run 4.
o
Cy~lf' 1, .,. =? t:: Cycle 2 J VH • 96 knots Cycle ), VH -s 93 knots
° ° °
.11--0 o ° Cbo o 00 Q] ° o O@~O
° ° &
°
~ o
., .,
3 .6 .1.
0
Bc
.L Cycle 11, VH • 91 knots Cycle 5, VH • 90 knots Cycle 6, VH ~ 88 knots
E 00
If ° 0o°
.2 o o 0 0 c 0 0 c o o
c
.,
.1. .2 .2 .1. .6
Slip ratio, 31
(e) Run 5.
f-'
-:j
\Jl Figure 74.- Concluded.



=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
.6
Cycle 1, V = 53 knots
H
0
::I. ~O 0
+'~
'" .4 0
. < r 1 < 1 8
o ( r J < 0
'H
'H 0
<11
0 0 0
(J 0
'" 0
.r0< .2
+'
.
(
r<
J
H &
~
o
(a) Run 1.
o
Spin-down
o
Spin-up
.6
Cycle 1, V = 95 knots
H
I
::I.
+' I
'"
o < r 1 < 1 .h 0 1
(J
or< 0
'H
'H 0 0
<11 0 j
0 (J 0 0 0 0 0 °0
0 '" 0 0 0
+
.r<
' .2 . 0 0 0 ® I
. ( r< J Ocfj
H
~
o .2 .4 .6 .5 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(b) Run 2.
Figure 75.- Tire R2, rib all-rubber tread, 9 grooves. Antiskid unit not
operating; p = 260 lb/sQ in.; d 1 = 0 to 0.) inch.
j
J



=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
'--.
-.---.-.---.--..,-.--~ ~-~
.6 80 Cycle I, VH = L5 knots Cycle 2, VH = lW knoes
00
I(t
~ o o 0
.b o o o S Sp p i i n n - - d u o p w n 0 ° ° o
.0° e o
o
.2 Dry runway o o o o o o
o
.2 .b .6 .8 1.0 o .2 .b .6 .8 1.0
.6
r:ycle J, VH ;: L2 knot::. Cycle L, V H ;: iJO knots Cycle 5, V H ;: )8 knot.s
;. o 0
c; .1" o &5b CCo 08
! ~ i ~o c aa o &6 0 @ o
t § : 8 o o o 8
c o o
j .2 o
.~::
o .2 .b 0 .2 .b .6 .8 1.0 o .? .b .6 .8 I.e
.6
Cycle 6, VH ;: )7 knots
.b f- 810l 0
00
00 o
8
.2
~ L __. _ ____ I 1 _
o .2 .b .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 51
(a) Run 1.
f-' Figure 76.- Tire R4, rib all-rubber tread, 11 grooves. Antiskid unit operating; p 260 lb/sq in.;
-..J PB , 1 = 50 lb/sq in.; d = 0.2 to 0.5 inch (except where noted).
-..J l



=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
~
CP
=
Cycle 1, V H 82 knots Cycle 2, V 78 knots
. H
}~
o
Coo ~
B EC~g
§l@o 0 Cb 8
0
OC
.? c
:i
.,
+'
C
,.Q.;)
()
'''; 0 .2 .4 -:6
"-'
'H c, o
8 Spin-down
()
o
c Spin-up
o
''';
+'
() .4 r
''';
~ H 0 ~ 0 0
§(§J 00 8=' 0 o 0 0
ceo 0
c§J 0 0
C 0 0
.2 ~ 0 C 0 0 C
Cycle 3, V = 75 knots Cycle 4, V = 71 knots
H H
0 .2 .4 .6 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Slip r ati o, s
1
(b ) Run 2.
Figure 76.- Concluded.
-------<..-.-. - -~- ----- -------"-~-1..~ __ -- - .---
---------~--



=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
- __ _ 0· _~ .• __, _--- .- - -..,.......---, .............. - - --
.6 ~
Cycle I, V H = S8 knotll I CYcle 2, VH :: 56 knots Cycle J. vH = SL knot!>
<Ii: 0 0
.L I-
o@
C C C. r ; .L 0
., I- 0 0 0 0 C 0 0 0 0 08 0 0 ., ~ 0 0 0 0 0
0 c 0 0 0 0
0
0
.,
.J. .6 .2 .L .6 .8 I.e
c Cycle II, VH = 51 k:lols T 0 0 !:'I Cvcl(' 5, \ :: L6 bets
~ t @ 0
tt 0 C
8 c9
0 'lo~ ~ o Spin-do,," 0
.~:: .2 0 0 0 0 o 0 c o Spin-up l
Dry runway
.2 .L .n .8 1.G .2 .L .6 .8
(a ) Run 1.
./,
ito
I:C cD <fP Cvclo I, V H - - 8) 'no"
[ ~
CyclEl 2. V" :: 82 knots :-Ic1f' J. vH :: 11 knots
avo@
00 <5l
.2 o
I 0
I
.,
.2 .L .L .> .J.
Slip ra \.10, 61
(b) Run 2.
Figure 77.- Tire R4, rib all-rubber tread, 11 grooves. Antiskid unit operating; p 260 lb/sq in.;
p B,l = 50 lb/sq in.; d l = 0 to 0.3 inch (except where noted).
~
\.D
--- - -'



=== PDF PAGE 183 ===
8 f-' ' .6 i 0
00 0 Cycle 1, VH ::: 28 knot.s Cycle 2, Vp :. 27 knots
0 0 <§> 0
.h f- 0 0
0
0 0 0
0 0 0 8
cP 0 0 0
.2 ~
0
0 o
Spin-down
."." o Spin-up
.6
. .
~.
. . . . . .
t o
0
Cyclo L, VH ::: 26 knots
r
Cycle 5, "1M ::: 25 knots
3
0 0 0
~ 0 0 0 o
E 0 0 o l6
0
.2
0
t
0
.h r tp Cycle 7, V H ::: 25 knots 0 Cycle 11, VH ::: 2) knots
0 00 0 0 0 0 0 o o o 0
.2 I- 0 0 0 0 0 o
0
0 0
0
I 1
0 .2 .h .6 .8 1.~ 0 .2 .h .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 81
(a ) Run 1.
Figure 78.- Tire R5, rib fabric-reinforced tread, 3 grooves . Antiskid unit operating;
p = 260 lb/ sq in.; dl = 0 to 0. 3 inch.
-- ---
-----~ .~~~.---- .. -~----- -----



=== PDF PAGE 184 ===
- --- -- ----
- - - - ----... --.-.------~. ~- .-~-~-----~~. ~ .. ----~~.-- ---- . .~ _. ---------- .. -~
.1.
eO 0 0 Cycle 1, VH = 51 knots 0 Cycle 2, VH = 50 knots
0 ~
DO
0 o 0 0 0 0 0
.2 f.- 0 Spin-down 00
0 0 o Spin-up 0
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .1. .0 .8 1.0
.4
Cycle ), VH = 49 knots Cycle 4, vH = 48 knots Cycle 5, v H = L7 knots
"- , ~ o ~o
.; o
0
.~.. 0
. . . u. . ~. . . . 0 0 0 00 OJ 0 0 ~~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
g~
"
~
~
c~.. 0 .2 .1. .S .8 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 .2 .4 .6 .S
.4
o
Cycle 6, VH = 47 knots
o
Cycle 7, VH = 46 knots
o o o o o 0 0 o D O o 0
DO 0 0
.2 o
o o
o .2 .1. .6 .8 o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 91
(b ) Run 2.
Figure 78.- Continued.
I-J
co
I-J
J



=== PDF PAGE 185 ===
~
())
r\)
r
.4
Cycle 1, VH 76 knots Cycle 2, V H 14 knots Cycle ) J V H '/L knots Cycle L, v H = 72 knot.
og
0 o 000 0 8
.2 o 0 o o 0 o
o
0 Do r9 0 B o0
o
' 60 00 0 0
o
o o
o .2 .4 .6 o .2 .4 o .2 .L
"-
.,
c .1,
~
. .~. . . . Cycle 5, VH " 70 knots Cycle 6, VH " 69 knots Cycle 7, VH " 68 knots
o~
- .~ U r c u , l ' ~ .2f- @ - ' V = I. ' 0 00 0 o Ib 8 i 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o S S p p i i n n - - u do p wn
c!:
)
o o .2 .4 0 .2 .4 .6
(c) Run 3.
", ,... .
.2 [r~ C o yc q le § 1 U , V "100 Cycle 3, VH = 96 knots Cycle 4, Vii " 93 knots rOOD O Cy ,' c " l e o 5 ~ ", ~
oct @ 0 0 0 " ,.";
f o 0 0 0 0 0 00 o ~ 0 0 0
o .2 .4 o .2 .4 .0 o ;2 .4 o .2 .4
Slip ratio, 81
(d) Run 4.
Figure 78.- Concluded.
L ___ _



=== PDF PAGE 186 ===
--- I
,~ ~--- ---
I
o
.6 o o 000
o 00 8 Cycle 2, V - B6 knots
Cycle 1, V '" 89 knots H
o ego H o
8
o ° o
o Spin-down
o
o
Spin-up
o o
.2 o o
o o
Dry runway Dry runway during spin-down only.
.4 o .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Cycle J, V "' 81 knots Cycle 4, V '"' 80 knots
o H H
o
o ° 00°0 00 0
o o o 0 o o CO 00
o 0 O~
o 0 0 o
8
c .6
.6
CvcJe ; , ":: = 77 ~,.,cts
i
I .U
0 0
\
i
.2
o
f
7 L-~~~ __~ ___l ___ I ____ I
t o .2 .1, .6 .8 l.O
I Slip ratio I 51
1
I (a ) Run 1.
Figure 79.- Tire R3, rib all-rubber tread, 9 grooves . Antiskid unit
operating; p = 260 lb/sq in.; d = 0 to 0. 3 inch (except where
l
noted). Runs in this f i gure are arranged chronologically (see
appendix ) .



=== PDF PAGE 187 ===
Q).o
.6
@ 0 0 0 Cycle 1, V H .. 67 knots .6[ ~O 0 0 Cycle ), V H - 64 knots
~ 0 0
0
.4 0 .4 0
0 8 0 <g
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0
.2 § .2
Dry runway Dry runway
0
0 0
.6 Cycle u, V H S 62 knots 0 0 S Sp p i i n n - - d u o p w n Cycle 5, VH .. 60 knots I
"" o 0 I
.. " . .. c ~; .. ; j . .4 0 @ @ 0 0 0 00 .4 ~O 0 I
.. : ' ; c 0 0 ; : 0 . J : l .2 0 0 0 0 0 O ~ .2 0 0 0 oJ ITJ) 0 0 0 00 0 ~ I I I
I
"
0
I
0 0
.6 0 0 II
0 Cycle 7, V H - 57 knots Cycle 8, V H - 55 knot.
0
I
0 I
.4 0 0 0 0 CD 0 l
[] 0 CO 0 ~
0 0 ~ 0 0
0 0
I,
0 0 r
.2 0 0 01
0
Dry runway 0
0
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio J 51
(b) Run 2 .
Figure 79·- Conti nued.
184



=== PDF PAGE 188 ===
.6 Cycle 1, V H ::: 6) knots 0 Cycle 2, VH = 61 l-r.ots
0
~ 0 0 0 0
0 0
.L 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cb 0
0 0
0 0
.2 0 0 0
0
Dry runway Dry runway 0
0
.6 0 0 4::l 0
Cycle 3, V H = 57 knots 0 Cycle L J VH = 57 )mot::>
"- 0 0 0
0
..~c. ~ .. .L 0 0 0 0
..g .. 0.. .. 0 0 o
o
Spin-dovn
G 0 0
Spin-up
0
~ .2 0 0
.t 0
Dry runway 0 Dry runway 0
--l
0
.6 0
0 Cycle 5, VH = 56 knots 0 0 C".,le 6, v H = 56 knots
0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0
.L
0
0 0 0
0
0 8 0
f .2
0
Dry runway Dry runway
r /8
0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.C
1 Slip ratio, ~l
(C) Run 3.
Figure 79·- Continued.
I
I
!
r,
t_



=== PDF PAGE 189 ===
I
j
1
l
I
.6 0 Cycle 7, VB = SL knot.s CJCle 8, "H = 5L knots
0
0 0 0 o
0 0 0 Spin-doyn
1
.L 0 C Spin-up
I
0 0 0
0 0
.2
0
Dry runway Dry runway I
0 (
.6 0 0 I
0 o Cycle 9, V = 50 knots o Cvcle 10, V H = 53 knots
0 H
"- 0 I
~. c
. ..... 3 u ! "... l . .L 0 o o o o o o o o o
o
c
~ .2
~
,t
Dry runway Dry runway
o
0
.6
Cyole n , V = 52 knots C)'t:le 12, V = 52 knots
0 H H
0
0 0 C('
.L 0 00 1
0
0 0
0 0 § 00 I
.2 0 o
Dry runway 0
0
0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.G 0 .2 .iJ .6 .8 loC
)
Slip ratio, sl
I
I
i
(c ) Run 3. Continued.
I
I
Figure 79.- Continued.
1
I
I
186
I
1
~



=== PDF PAGE 190 ===
Cycle 13, VH = 52 knots Cycle 14, V • 51 knots
.6 H
o
Spin-down
0 o
.4 0 0 Spin-up 0
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
.2 0 0 0 0
0 !Q
0
I
I 0
.6
T Cycle 15, \ = 51 knots Cycle 16, V = 50 knots
@ a H
""
.~c.. .L a 0
. . ~. . g ~ . . . . 8 8 a 0 8
: c l .2 0 Oa 8 0 a 0
~
t: Dry runway
0
.6 0 a
&b 0 Cycle 17, V H = 49 knots a 0 0 Cycle 18, V H • 48 knots
0
0
J .4
0 0 a
0 0 0
J 00
0
a
.2
;
Dry runway Dry runway
1
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, 91
(C) Run 3· Continued.
Figure 79·- Continued.



=== PDF PAGE 191 ===
.6 o Cycle Ie; J V H = '18 knots 0 0 0 Cycle 20, Vu = 07 knc.ts
o
0 Spin-down 0 0
LJ Spin-up 0
.~ 0
0
0 0 0
00
.2
0
"- Dry runway Dry runway
.;
c
!l
.u..
....... n
3
.6
c o Cycle 21, V = L7 knots Cycle 22, V = L6 knots
.~.. H CD 0 o H
t ~ : 0 0 0 0 0
o o o
.~ 0 °eo o
o o
o o
o
.2
Dry runway Dry runway
)
o .2 .~ .6 .6 loG o .2 .~ .6 .6 1.G
Slip ratio, 81 j
(c ) Run 3. Concluded.
Figure 79.- Continued.
I
i
)
1
i
I
I
1
I
188
J
I
L



=== PDF PAGE 192 ===
.6 0C{] 0
0 Cycle 1, V H = 76 knot.s CYcle 2, '1H = 7'2 knots
0
0 0
.1. o Spin-down 0
0 0 00
o
0 0 Spin-up
0 0 8 0
.2 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 e
0 0 0 0 ~
0 Dry runway
0
0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0 0 .2 .L .6 .6 1.0
.:,1 .L
! c i Cycle ), V H = 70 knots Cycle L, \ = 69 knots
. . .. . !. . . . l oc:P o
~ 8 c ~ .2 0 0 0 0 0 rP IJ€ arJ o ~ ~ o 0n '- - V .O 0 0
O
I ~ 0
0
0 .2 .L .6 .8 o .2 .L
I
I .6 C 0 00
i
CYcle 5, vH = L6 knots
0
0 o 0
0
.4 0
1
! 0 0 0 0
0 0 8
0
.2
0 0
Dr,.. runvay
1 0
o .2 .1. .6 .8 1.0
I Slip ratio, 51
(d ) Run 4.
Figure 79.- Continued.
t
t
I
189
l
--~



=== PDF PAGE 193 ===
I
1
I
.8 f
= l
Cycle 1, V 72 knots
H
=
Cycle 2, V 69 knots
H
ct,
!
.6 CPJ .6
0
~, 0
.' 0
.tt 0 .4 ~O
0
0 0
0 () n
:1- .2 0 .2 0 0 n 0 0 0
..,~ 0 0 00
<! 0
.rQ<) 0 Dry runway 0
0
' . - r - < < 0 0
'--<
aQ) 0
0 0
..,a<
...,
!
,
o
Spin-down
r .r0 ! < : o Spin-up Cycle 4, v H = 60 knots
.6 (;0
c
DO
Cycle ) , V H = 67 knots 0 0 0 0
0 0
.[, .[,
0 0 I
0 1
0
&0
COo cO DeB CQ) 0 {
.2 .2
0 0 0
a Dry runway
.0
~
I
0 .2 .[, 0 .2 .L .6 .8 1.0
Slip ratio, sl I
(e ) Run 5.
Figure 79.- Conclude·d.
J
<
I
I
190 L-1347
NASA-Langley, 1962
j
L
