=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
NASA CASE NO. LAR 14160-1
?
PRINT FIG. 1
NOTICE
The invention disclosed in this document resulted from research in aeronautical and
space activities performed under programs of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. The invention is owned by NASA and is, therefore, available for
licensing in accordance with the NASA Patent Licensing Regulation (14 Code of
Federal Regulations 1245.2).
To encourage commercial utilization of NASA-owned inventions, it is NASA policy to
grant licenses to commercial concerns. Although NASA encourages nonexclusive
licensing to promote competition and achieve the widest possible utilization, NASA
will provide the necessary incentive to the licensee to achieve early practical
application of the invention.
Address inquiries and all applications for license for this invention to NASA Patent
Counsel, Langley Research Center, Code 143, Hampton, Virginia 23681-0001.
Serial No.: 08/111,321
08/23/93 LaRC
(',_ASA-Case-LAR-I 4 1 o0- ] ) REMOTE N94-15884
TIKF PRESSURE SENSING [ECHN[wUE
Patent Apolication (NASA) 9 p
Unclas
G3/35 0190863



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
NASA Case No. LAR 1416 0-1
AWARDS ABSTRACT
REMOTE TIRE PRESSURE SENSING TECHNIQUE
One of the most widely used and relatively simple devices for measuring tire
air pressure is a calibrated manual tire pressure gage. The tire pressure gage fits
over the stem of the tire and allows the user to read the pressure measurement
directly. Oftentimes, however, reading the pressure of a tire directly becomes
exceedingly impractical or impossible. This is true when the stem of the tire is
inaccessible or when the tire is rotating.
A remote tire pressure sensing technique is provided which uses vibration
frequency to determine tire pressure. A vibration frequency measuring device is
attached to the external surface of a tire which is then struck with an object,
causing the tire to vibrate. The frequency measuring device measures the
vibrations and converts the vibrations into corresponding electrical impulses. The
electrical impulses are then fed into the frequency analyzing system which uses the
electrical impulses to determine the relative peaks of the vibration frequencies as
detected by the frequency measuring device. The measured vibration frequency
-
peaks are then compared to predetermined data describing the location of vibration
frequency peaks for a given pressure, thereby determining the air pressure of the
tire.
The novelty of this method is found in providing a method for remotely
sensing tire pressure which may be automated.
Inventors: Howard H. Robin-son Tim othy A. NcGinnis
Address: 201 Pageland Drive 133 Roland Drive
Yorktown. VA 23693 Ham~tonV, A 23669
0
ss: ss:
Employer: NASA LaRC Wyle Laboratories
Robert H. Daugherty
104 Chestnut Court
Yorktown, VA 23692
ss:
Initial Evaluator: Huey E. Carden
Serial No.: 0811 1 1,321
Filed: 08\23\93



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
LAR 141 60-1 -1 - PATENT APPLICATION
REMOTE TIRE PRESSURE SENSING TECHNIQUE
Origin of the Invention
5 The invention described herein was made by employees of the
United States Government and may be used by or for the Government for
governmental purposes without payment of any royalties thereon or
therefor.
10 Technical Field of the Invention
The invention relates to a tire air pressure sensing technique, and
more particularly, to a mechanism for remotely sensing the pressure of an
inflatable tire by measuring tire vibration frequency.
15
Background of the Invention
Since the invention of inflatable tires and their application to motor
vehicles, many techniques have evolved for measuring pneumatic tire air
2O pressure. One of the most widely used and relatively simple devices for
measuring tire air pressure is a calibrated manual tire pressure gage. The
tire pressure gage fits over the stem of the tire and allows the user to read
the pressure measurement directly.
Oftentimes, however, reading the pressure of a tire directly becomes
25 exceedingly impractical or impossible. This is true when the stem of the
tire is inaccessible or when the tire is rotating. The importance of
developing a reliable means for remotely measuring tire air pressure has
been heightened with the advent of the Space Age. In particular, the need
for a remote tire air pressure sensing technique for use on stationary
30 vehicles has become of great importance with the development of the



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
LAR 14160-1 -2- PATENT APPLICATION
Space Shuttle. When the Space Shuttle is secured onto a launch pad, the
stems of the tires of the Shuttle are inaccessible. Consequently, if the air
pressure of a tire of the Shuttle is suspected of being outside tolerance
limits, the Shuttle has to be dismantled from the launch pad and the tire
pressure checked directly. Such a procedure can cause considerable delay
of a scheduled launch.
Several methods for remotely sensing tire air pressure have been
disclosed. For example, U.S. 4,742,712 (Kokubu) discloses a method for
detecting low tire pressure. Kokubu locates a pressure switch on a tire
10 wheel side. When the tire pressure falls below a predetermined value, the
pressure switch is turned on, thereby causing a vibration to be produced.
The vibration, detected by a vibration detecting device, indicates low tire
pressure.
Another device, disclosed in U.S. 4,630,470 (Brooke et al),
15 determines relative tire pressure using vibration frequency. The device
disclosed requires each tire of a vehicle to transverse corrugated sections
of a roadway, thereby causing each tire to vibrate. Any variation in
vibration among tires is indicative of abnormal pressure. This device,
because it requires a vehicle to transverse corrugated sections, is
20 inapplicable for use on stationary vehicles. Furthermore, it only detects
relative tire pressure, not absolute tire pressure.
Other methods for detecting low tire air pressure have been
developed which involve attaching pressure sensors to the rotating part of
each wheel which transmits electronic signals to a signal processing
25 means. Generally, these methods measure tire pressure indirectly by
measuring stress exerted on a wheel by various air pressures in a tire.
These indirect pressure measurements tend to lack accuracy; for example,
moving a Shuttle from a hanger to a launch pad can cause a change in
wheel stress without any appreciable change in tire air pressure.
30 Consequently, particularly in view of such innovations as the Space



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
LAR 141 60-1 -3- PATENT APPLICATION
Shuttle, there is a need for a remote tire pressure detection means for use
on a stationary vehicle.
An object of the present invention is to provide an apparatus and a
method for remotely sensing and measuring air pressure of an inflatable
5 object.
A further object of the present invention is use of pre-determined
data correlating vibration frequency with air pressure, thereby allowing the
use of vibration frequency to indirectly determine air pressure.
10 Summary of the Invention
To meet the foregoing and additional objects, this invention discloses
a process and an apparatus for remotely sensing air pressure of inflatable
objects. The new apparatus consists of a vibration inducing means, a
15 vibration detecting means, an attachment means to secure the vibration
detecting means to a surface of an inflatable object, and a vibration
measuring means to measure the frequency peaks of the vibrations
detected by the vibration detecting means.
An especially beneficial means for inducing vibration is a hammer.
2O An accelerometer attached to the surface of an inflatable object with two-
sided tape is an effective means of measuring vibrations induced by the
vibration inducing means. Finally, a computer frequency analyzer is an
effective means for converting the vibration data from the vibration
detection means into data which can indicate pneumatic pressure of the
25 inflatable object.
Description of the Preferred Embodiment
The present invention is a new apparatus and method for remotely
30 sensing pneumatic pressure of an inflatable object.



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
LAR 14160-1 -4- PATENT APPLICATION
Preferably, the apparatus consists of a hammer 14, an accelerometer
18 temporarily attached to the inflatable object 42, and a frequency
analyzer 20 attached to the accelerometer 48 via a coaxial cable 22.
The use of the apparatus involves attaching the accelerometer 48 to
5
the inflatable object 12 in such a way as to measure radial acceleration.
For example, in the case of a tire 12, the best location to attach the
accelerometer 18 is the tread area. Any suitable temporary attachment
means, such as two-sided tape 16, can accomplish the attachment.
The accelerometer 18 then is connected electrically to a frequency
10
analyzer which, on the basis of predetermined data, correlates vibration
frequency peaks to tire pressure. The connection of the accelerometer 18
to the frequency analyzer 20 preferably is via a coaxial cable 22.
Practically any device can be used to strike the inflatable object and
cause the object to vibrate. An especially preferred device for a vibration
15
inducing means is a hammer 14 which cues the frequency analyzer 20 to
begin taking data. The cue hammer 14 strikes the inflatable object 12
causing an electrical impulse to travel through an attached coaxial cable 24
connected to the frequency analyzer 20. The frequency analyzer 20 then
receives vibration signals from the accelerometer 18.
2O
In an alternative embodiment, the vibration inducing means could be
permanently attached to a vehicle and, upon an appropriate signal, be
caused to strike the inflatable object. Such a device would allow the
vibration inducing means to be controlled remotely.
What is claimed is:



=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
5
LAR 141 60-1 _ PATENT APPLICATION
REMOTE TIRE PRESSURE SENSING TECHNIQUE
Abstract
A remote tire pressure sensing technique is provided which uses
vibration frequency to determine tire pressure. A vibration frequency
measuring device is attached to the external surface of a tire which is then
struck with an object, causing the tire to vibrate. The frequency measuring
device measures the vibrations and converts the vibrations into
10 corresponding electrical impulses. The electrical impulses are then fed into
the frequency analyzing system which uses the electrical impulses to
determine the relative peaks of the vibration frequencies as detected by the
frequency measuring device. The measured vibration frequency peaks are
then compared to predetermined data describing the location of vibration
15 frequency peaks for a given pressure, thereby determining the air pressure
of the tire.



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
I'A
1"2--
I
"2..0



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===

