=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
13. SOME EXPERIENCE WITH TIRE WEAR AND DAMAGE
ON GROOVED RUNWAYS
By Robert H. Hout
Hill Air Force Base
The Ogden Air Materiel Area (OOAMA), Hill Air Force Base, Ogden, Utah, has the
prime responsibility for new tires for out-of-production aircraft and the total responsi-
bility for the retread tire program of the U.S. Air Force. Since March 1968, this com-
mand has become increasingly alarmed with tire tread stripping problems associated
with the B-52 and KC-135 aircraft. It was not until July 1968 that OOAMA associated the
grooved runway at Beale Air Force Base, California, as the primary contributory cause
of this problem.
Castle Air Force Base, California, is presently involved with extensive crew
training in B-52 and KC-135 aircraft. These aircraft perform a majority of their
training touch-and-go landings at Beale AFB. The Castle AFB tire problems, therefore,
have been directly associated with the grooved runway at Beale AFB.
Some recent published reports are claiming extensive improvements in traction
with no tire damage during braking on grooved runways at slip ratios up to and well
beyond peak braking. Contrary to these published reports, the Air Force is experiencing
considerable damage, such as depicted in figures 1, 2, and 3, to cargo- and bomber-type
aircraft tires. Considerable damage is also being inflicted on tires on some aircraft that
are performing only touch-and-go training missions. This damage is being experienced
on both new and retreaded tires.
A recent visit to three overseas Air Force Bases, which have grooved runway con-
struction, revealed that the new tires on fighter aircraft were being badly chevron cut and
some chipping was occurring. Base maintenance personnel were blaming the barrier
cables on the runway for the damage; however, examination of the tires revealed them to
be typical chevron-type cuts. The same aircraft operating from other bases, with the
runway not grooved but equipped with barrier cables on the runway, are not experiencing
the same type of damage.
OOAMA is presently exploring a new-tire procurement program entitled "Life Cycle
Procurement" which involves a special testing program to evaluate wear and performance
of each manufacturer's tire. The Air Force then procures tires based on performance
instead of low bid price. This program is inducing manufacturers of new and retread
tires to produce improved designs for competition. The present industry practice for
tire qualification is a dynamic wheel test to a specific profile. This method of
185



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
qualification may not suffice for future procurement unless a specific service test is
performed on a grooved runway for final qualification.
Hill AFB is impressed with the results of runway grooving for aircraft control in
adverse weather conditions. This approach appears to be the most promising yet under-
taken. It should be pointed out, though, that considerable work remains to be done to
arrive at a workable solution. The tire manufacturers must be allowed to test their
products further and thereby to arrive at a groove configuration or tire design that can
be properly handled. Therefore, OOAMA recommends that further runway grooving on
USAF runways be discontinued until the problems can be rectified. OOAMA also feels
that commercial operators may be confronted with the same problems when the frequency
of their operations on grooved runways reaches the level encountered by the Castle AFB
aircraft.
OOAMA is deeply concerned with tire tread stripping. Safety of flight is involved
in that a thrown tread can damage hydraulic lines, wheel wells, and gear uplock mecha-
nisms. The Beale AFB runway is being swept daily for one aircraft to prevent jet engine
compressor damage. Considerable research should be accomplished on the effects of
runway grooving on tires from all manufacturers and retreaders. Rubber compounding
or grooving configurations must be changed to correct the cited problems. Further
grooving of any USAF runways at this time would negate the OOAMA current tire improve-
ment program and pose serious saf ety-of -flight problems.
186



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Figure 1
Figure 2
187



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Figure 3
18%
