=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
0
ITHRUI
P- IACCESSIONfiUMBER)
U
E /
a-
>c (PAGES1 "Z I
KI,WB'd(
i2l
(NASA CR OR Tux OR AD NUMBER) (CATEGORY)
oQQinTgir e der Load
- . ...--
I
Samuel K. Clark
CFSTl PRICE(S) $
Dept, of Engineering Mechanics, University of Michigan
vfl
I
Hard copy (HC)
I
Microfiche (MF)
t&
ff 653 July 85
I
Mid-Y ear R'i eeti ng
Chicago, 111. 650493
May 17-21, 1965



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
650493
lling Tire der Loa I
Samuel K. Clark
Dept. of Engineering Mechanics, University of Michigan
IT IS A reasonably good approximation to state that most In view of the many current problems associated with
pneumatic tire problems can be separated into two groups, pneumatic tire motion in the plane of the wheel, it was felt
these being: desirable to attempt to extend these analytical techniques
to those dynamic cases that could be profitably studied.
1. Those involving motion in the plane of the wheel or
rim. BASIC DYNAMIC MODEL FOR A ROLLING TIRE
2. Those involving motion transverse to the plane of the
wheel or rim. We consider first a generalized cylindrical shell under
arbitrary loads. This is shown in Fig. 1, 'taken from Flugge
There are, of course, occasional exceptions to this com- (4).
partmentalization, but in the main it is felt that consider- From Fig. 1, force equilibrium equations may be written
able knowledge could be gained by developing methods for for the element of cylindrical shell surface. Generally, ,
separately studying pneumatic tire performance, either in these equations are directed in the "xa and "rn directions,
the plane of the wheel or transverse to the plane of the and are given as
wheel. i
+ N ' + P . a = o
Preliminary efforts have been made by such writers as x ex x
Saito (1)* and Thorsen (2) in developing techniquesfor pre-
dicting cornering forces and other effects transverse to the
plane of the wheel. To the best of the writer's knowledge,
no systematic attempts prior to Ref. 3 have been made to M " + G x e + 3 +*MI + a N e - P a2 = o
study motion in the plane of the wheel. In that report, the
9 ex x r
use of an elastically supported cylindrical shell was proposed
as a means for studying the static loading of a pneumatic The following symbols are used:
tire against an infinitely rigid, frictionless plane. The re-
sults obtained from that anlysis seemed to agree fairly well
with contact patch length measurements made on real pneu-
It is next necessary to consider displacements of a cylin-
matic tires.
drical shell, where we let
Numbers in parentheses designate References at end of u = Displacement along the generator, positive in the
paper. direction of increasing "xa
ABS TRACT
Methods are presented for calculating dynamic contact contact patch areas are obtained analytically, and the tech-
patch areas of an elastically supported cylindrical shell used niques involved are given. The shell is used as a basis for
to model the dynamic rolling of a loaded pneumatic tire. calculating load carrying and drag properties of a pneumatic
These areas are shown to be influenced considerably by roll- tire SO that various tire parameters may be a2proxirnated.
ing velocity, constructional parameters of the tire, and its The results given here are typical of information obtainable
loss characteristics. Dynamic pressure distributions within from such a model.



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
,
'.
v = Displaccrnent along a circle of radius -a", positive
.
in direction of increasing 8
w = Radial displacement, positive outward a
Using this notation and assuming that:
1. All points lying on one normal to the middle surface
~
before deformation do the same after deformation.
If one uses Eqs. 3 and substitutes them into Eqs. 1, it is
2. For all kinematic relations, the distance "2" of apoint
possible to obtain the three equations of equilibrium in
from the middle surface may be considered as unaffected by
terms of the three differential equations in displacements
the deformations of the shell.
u, v, and w of the middle surface of the shell. Theseequa-
3. The stress a may be considered negligible compared
r tions become
I with the stresses a and a
I X 0'
By use of such assumptions, and by consideration of the + u + +- - I.1 u" + -1 + p v + '+ pw + 01 2
2 2
definitions of shell forces, one may finally express the vari-
ous shell forces and moments in terms of the deformation
by means of the following equations:
-
=Da * K
Ne (v' + w + PU) + 3 (W + w")
a
b . K ++
, N X = - ( ~ + p v m+ p ~ ) - - W
a 3
a
p Z + v ' + w
- I
+ a 2 [1z - p 0u' * - S u I. -- 3 - p + v + ' + +w. ++ I2 3' t wl" + 2w" + w
2
= - - D + Lv ) +-* K -1 - p ( L v - w L ' )
Nxe a 2 a 3 2
(4)
K ++
Me =-(W + w"+ p ~ )
2
a
We next wish to consider the specific case of a rathernar-
row cylindrical shell that has no variation of loading with
respect to the direction. In this case, the shell takes on
"XI
the form shown in Fig. 2, where a shell of width b and
W
A r
I
I
-
Fig. 1 Shell stress
dx
x8
resultant conventions
and nomenclature



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
~~
g 3
% ' '.
k: 2
thickness "h" iqmade of material of modulus E and density radial pressures exist. Note that the constant a is given by
,
p, the radius of the cylinder being "a."
2 h2
If the loading is uniform with respect to the "x" direc- I a = -
- 2
tion, and if the width b is small enough so that contrac 12a
W
cion in the .x" direction may be neglected, then one may In Eq. 7 it is desirable to include most of the properties
visualize that all derivatives with respect to "x" in Eqs. 4 of a teal pneumatic tire by means of adjusting the radial
will vanish. In addition, all displacements "u" in the "x' pressure term p for various tire effects. Specifically, it is
r
direction become negligible and will be dropped, as will
desired to support the elastic shell by means of some kind of
pressure components in the "x" direction. Allowing these
generalized impedance, in such a way that both real elastic
simplifying assumptions to be used in Eqs. 4 causes them to
moduli and imaginary elastic moduli can be operative. This
reduce to
might be thought of, in some respects, as filling the inside
2 of the shell with a massless foamlike material.
a
= o For purposes of this report, the generalized impedance
-
will be reduced to the specific case of a real elastic and vis
cous loss support system, but it is readily understood that the
viscous loss support mechanism may be replaced by other
mechanisms such as a hysteresis type of loss. For the pres-
ent, the viscous loss mechanism represents a very simple de-
vice which is easily treated analytically, and for that reason
There are several ways that one may proceed to analyze
will be retained here.
I
Eqs. 5. Perhaps the simplest of these is to visualize, that for a As an additional feature of Eq. 7, it is desirable to in-
frictionless plane P6 vanishes, so that the first of Eqs. 5
clude both a uniform internal inflation pressure and an ex-
simply states that ternal pressure loading term denoting contact pressures com-
(z ing from contact with the ground surface.
Finally, inertia terms form part of the radial loading,
+ w) =Constant
since it may be anticipated that the shell in question will
be accelerating in the "wn direction as well as being sub-
This same term occurs in the second of Eqs. 5. It is im- jected to an overall rigid body rotation of angular velocity
mediately recognized as being connected to the circumfer - 62. After accounting for all these factors, one may write the
entia1 membrane strain through the well-known relation total radial pressure of the shell in the form
2
pr = -ph[G -(a + w)62 1 (8a)
a p, = - kw (8b)
Pr = cw ( 8 ~ )
It is simplest to carry this term along in the equations for
some time before assigning it a specific value. Hence, Eqs. P, = Po
5 may now be written as
P, = -P(e)
2
assuming that tangential velocities are negligible and where
This equation now represents the equation for deflection
-
By including all these effects into Eq. 7, one finally ob
of a cylindrical shell against a frictionless load, so that only
tains
2 2
a € i-a wi -a c \;I + Ct2WIV + 2a2w.
Eh
m' c 2
1
+ w [ ~ t ' + ~ - - ] = ~ [ p ~2 - ) o + p h n 6 2 "1
-
Fin. 2 Narrow cvlindrical shell notation (9)
Y



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
In this equation, the presence of the O2 term is due to Introducing the variable
the fact that the shell is assumed to be rotating with angular
velocity 51. We shall next allow loads to move in the 52a -
' ,=51
opposite direction to 52, around the periphery of the rotating c,
I
shell, by means of transforming the'shell equations into a
new independent variable:
one finally obtains Eq. 13 in the form:
- a 2 - ( - (") - 2n( * ) + 61 2 ( )" = - a [-,(e) + po + phaQ I'
2
at (10) Eh
Using these, one obtains In Eq. 15, we define the new constants as follows:
f
2
+ a2wIV + 2a w" +.w a + - - - and dividing by a , one finally obtains the equation of mo-
2 [2 tion:
e
'rn i' c . 2z2
- + - + - z --i'+ ZIV+
2 2 2
a2 a a U
where --
=f
c
a
1 P
Next, introduce the new variables (see Ref. 5): --P E fi2 Po
= +-+-
a a2 a2
tC -
-W= z; - =1 r ; c 2 --E
a a 1 P where:
- 2
ka
from which the equation of motion of the shell may now be k = -
Eh
written in the form
.. Eq. 17 is an equation for motion of the cylindrical shell
acc
1.. 2a61 2 IV and contains all terms necessary for representing most of the
e + z + - z - - i ' + a z
Eh C phenomena that can be observed in a rolling pneumatic
'rn 1
tire. Loss terms are represented through the viscous loss
( constant F, dynamic terms through the quantity E, and elas-
a2 +-k-a-2 Q2a2) z tic terms through the quantity E. The angular velocity of
E h E h the wheel is given by the dimensionless angular velocity 5 ,
so that Eq. 17 in effect represents a circular cylindrical
shell, supported as indicated in Fig. 3, with a moving load
of angular velocity 52.
r 1
In addition to this angular velocity 52, one may super-
impose a rigid body rotation of angular velocity Sa in the
opposite direction, as was done with the inertia term of



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
5
the form (a + w)Q 2 *. i n Eq. 8. This term, whose effect is to which implicitly defines the dimensionless displacement "z"
superimpose the rigid body rotation of angular velocity as being measured from the inflated position. Using this,
on the entire system, results in Eq. 17, now representing the Eq. 19 may be written in the form
rotating tire with stationary impressed load, such as is shown
in Fig. 3. IV+ ( 2 + WA) Z'' - (CWA)Z
W e now consider steady-state solutions to Eq. 17. Under
this condition, all time derivatives vanish, and by making
substitutions of constants in the form
where Z is used to emphasize that this displacement is meas-
ured from the inflated tire as a reference. From this equa -
tion one sees that the static problem may be obtained read-
01 01 a ily by allowing the values of both W A and CW A to vanish
(18) simultaneously. This causes Eq. 21 to reduce immediately
-PE -PO to
= p; =PA
2 - 2 -
01 ci z IV + 2z" + (1 + K A ) =~ - pe ( 22)
' one sees this reduces to
which was used in Ref. 3.
€
-
'rn + zIv + (2 + WA)z" - (CWA)z' + (1 + KA - WA)z THE CONTACT PATCH REGION
2
a.
-
= PA PO + WA ( 19) There are two problems associated with attempting to
define the region or length of contact of the tire model
where, of course, the primes represent derivatives with re- pressed against a frictionless plane. The first of these is the
spect to the variable 8 and, in general, Eq. 19 represents determination in some form or another of some of the elas-
1
tic constants that fit into the various equations of motion
steady-state, or standing-wave, solutions to the deformation
just developed, particularly Eq. 21, which is the primary
of the rotating cylindrical shell.
@ I 2 s tatement of deformation from the inflated state.
It is now necessary to define the constant E 01 .This
One method of accomplishing this is to observe that the
m
static case of Eq. 21, given in this report as Eq. 22, indi-
will be done by making the following basic assumptions: -
cates that the static problem of contact is a relatively sim
ple one involving only a single elastic constant, the dimen-
1. The process of inflation will be considered as one in-
sionless foundation modulus denoted here by the symbol KA.
volving membrane effects only.
It should be possible to determine the value of KA by appro-
2. The process of deforming the tire in the contactpatch
priate tests on various real tires, in which certain deflections
will be considered as one involving bending effects only.
are imposed and the resulting contact patch lengths are
measured. Experiments indicate that this may indeed be
Based on these ideas, we may let
~ done.
Similar techniques have not yet been developed for the
direct measurement of other elastic constants appearing in
Eq. 21. For purposes of this report, tire construction may
be used as a guide in calculating some of the constants
appearing in this equation, and ,in this respect we are rather
fortunate in having available a background in the material
properties of cord rubber laminates. By the use of such in-
formation, one could generally hope to obtain the remaining
constants necessary in Eq. 21.
In connection with Eq. 21, one must next decide on tech-
niques for treating the deformation of the cylindrical shell
model against a frictionless plane. In doing this, it is seen
that the left side of the equation contains terms invoIving
deflections, and the right side contains only the external
pressure loading term. If one could know the deflections
of the shell model inside the contact patch regioii, then it
- might be possible to specify the values "z" on the left side
Fig. 3 Shell cham- of Eq. 21 and to calculate the particular values of e, for
teristics which the external pressure vanished, by means of the right



=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
side vanishing in Eq. 21. This may be accomplished by ref- and most direct of these would be to manufacture a model
erence to Fig. 4. from which one may deduce by geometry of the type visualized here and actually to conduct tests in-
that volving its rolling over some essentially frictionless plane,
in such a way that pressure distributions, total vertical loads,
cos e and drag forces could be measured accurately.
(23) If the properties of the model were well known, then the
e
COS
predictions of the theory could be compared with measured
z
where = w/ao data. However, such a series of experiments becomes rather
difficult when they must be done on a flat plane as visual-
ized here, since the equipment for rolling a wheel on such
The first, second, and fourth derivatives of this function
a flat surface is expensive and complicated. For that reason
are needed, and these work out to be
a different approach will be used here, where one attempts
to utilize physical data that closely approximates those of a
real tire, and attempts to predict some of the known oper-
ating characteristics of such a tire.
In some respects this method is less satisfactory than the
first process, since it is known that many of the important
operating characteristics of a tire depend heavily on the
form of its internal loss. These internal loss characteristics
are not necessarily well defined for rubber-cord combina-
- cos e tions. It is clear that a simple viscous loss law does not rep-
IV
resent such loss characteristics very well, but the form is
cos e 4
COS e quite simple and will serve to illustrate the method of cal-
culation. For this reason it should be pointed out clearly
Once having obtained these derivatives, it may be seen that the purpose of this example is not to model a specific
at once that, given the proper elastic constants, all terms tire exactly, but rather to introduce a technique that, given
of Eq. 21 may be evaluated by using Ms. 23-26, which the proper loss characteristics, can be used to perform such
-
physically means that the outer surface of the shell is in modeling. Hence, the resulting calculations are only indi
contact with the flat plane of Fig. 4. We then search for cations of the general nature of tire behavior under such con-
the pressures Pe in Eq. 21, which cause this situation to oc- ditions. The fact that some of the important characteristics
cur, seem to agree with actual tire characteristics gives hope that
Inside the region of the contact patch such pressures will the theoretical framework outlined here will have some util-
be positive, and outside the'contact patch region such pres- ity as a tool in predicting the response of a real pneumatic
m.
sures will )e negative. Thus we search for solutions to tire.
21 in which the right-hand side is zero. Such solutionsmust One must first turn to the constants needed in evaluating
e,
be functions of the angle and such solutions thus give an- Eq. 21. Basically, these constants are exactly those that one
gles 8 that define the ends of the contact patch. must use to define the overall characteristics of a circular
Note that all functions on the left side of Eq. 21areeven
except for the first derivative function, which occurs incon-
nection with the damping term. If the damping is nonzero,
then it may be seen that the forward and aft angular loca-
tions of the contact patch will not be equal to one another,
and in general this has been observed to be a fact. Use of
Eq. 21 thus gives dynamic information concerning the con-
tact patch in a rolling tire under the assumptions of com-
plete contact with the flat plane.
h a later section of this paper a specific example of the
calculation of contact patch length under dynamic condi -
tions will be presented. For the moment, the theory is com-
plete and need be worked out only for the proper numerical
cases.
CALCULATIONS AND EXAMPLES
There are at least two methods for attempting to verify
-
some of the thoretical ideas brought out by the use of a Fig. 4 Geometry of intersection of elastic shell with rigid
model such as that proposed in this report. Perhaps the best plane surface



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
-~ ~~ , , , , . . . . .. , .. . . , .. . ,
I
7
cylindrical shell of the type proposed here. An attempt has complishcd by fixing the angle 0 of Eq. 23 or of Fig, 4.
0
bccn mad,: to chose such chnractcristics to be compatible
Oncc thc limits of the coiltact patch arc known, one may
with n 7.50 x 14.00 automotive tire, and the resulting nu-
utilize Eqs. 21 and Eqs. 23-26 to calculate the prcssure dis-
merical values are being used for subsequent calculations:
tribution in the contact patch. Given the pressure distribu-
tion, the total load and the drag force may be obtained by
b = 4.25 in. E = 10,000 psi
W integration. For this example, the vertical tire deflection
will be allowed to vary from 0.5 to 2.0 in. The linear ve-
a = 12.35 in. h = 1.14 in. (27) locity will be allowed to range from 0 to 120 mph, and the
inflation pressure will take on four values, 0, 15, 24, and
-4 2 4
a = 13.35 in. p = 1 X 10 lb-sec /in. 40 psi.
0
In these calculations it is necessary to have some value
c/a2
Using this particular value of the outside radius of the for the dimensionless foundation modulus = KA. It was
wheel, a (namely, 13.35 in.), one finds that the angular previously pointed out that this quantity can be obtained di-
0
rectly from a static test in which the length of the contact
velocity is related to the linear speed in miles per hour by
patch is measured, and for the particular tire in question,
the relation
a value of KA = 325 was obtained.
The results of these calculations are first given in Fig. 5,
Q = 1.32 rad/sec/mph (28)
where the forward and aft boundaries of a typical contact
patch are plotted as a function of rolling velocity.
Consider next the problem of calculating the response of
One might note from Fig. 5 that, generally speaking, the
a pneumatic tire having the properties given in Eqs. 27 un-
tire exhibits a forward shift of the contact patch with speed,
der conditions of given velocity and load. For this purpose,
in that both the forward and aft edges move forward with
one must first specify the loss law to be used. The viscous
velocity. This causes the entire pressure distribution to
loss type of law previously discussed will be utilized here,
move forward and results in a shift of the center of pressure
and the damping factor "c" will be chosen as
forward of the axle point so as to cause a drag force. This
again seems to agree generally with experience.
c = 0.10 (29)
In Fig. 6 are shown curves of the influence of rolling ve-
locity on vertical load carried at constant tire deflection.
This is based on interpretation of oscillograph records from
These curves are plotted for two different values of inflation
free vibration tests of a pneumatic subjected to an impul-
pressures. Generally, the influence of speed is to increase
sive blow.
load at fixed deflection. Conversely, at fixed load, one
A digital computer program has been constructed, which
would expect deflection to decrease with speed. Hence, roll-
first calculates the forward and aft edges of the contactpatch
ing radius would increase with speed, as has been observed.
at a fixed value of damping constant and for various values
In Fig. 7, the drag force is plotted as a function of tire
of the other parameters listed in Eqs. 27 and 28. Thisisdone
- deflection for four different values of internal pressure, all
by specifying ;he tire deflection, which is effectively ac
data being calculated at a constant forward speed of 40 mph
These curves are almost entirely dependent upon the de-
-
AFT -FWD
7 80 n I4 TIRE AWROX.
wirn visccus LOSS
7 50 a 14 SIZE APPROX
flXED TIRE DEFLECTKWI. wiin VISCOUS LOSS LAW
FIXE0 TIRE DEFLECTION OF 1.
I'
0
5.40~~1
0
1000
t
I
-
PATCH TERMINAL POINT RADIANS
-
Fig. 5 Contact patch length and position as a function of VELOCITY, MPM
-
)'. t I Fia. 6 VFrricgl lonrl nc a f'tlnctinn -f -.*--A



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
'8
tailed form of the loss lzw that is assumed for this particular So far all the results presented have been speculative in
model, a viscous law with losses assigned only to the foun- the sense that good experimental data have not been avail-
dation. Nevertheless. the calculations do illustrate the gen- able as a check. However, there is one static quantity that
I era1 form of the results obtained, and show that cvcn for this can be easily measured, and that is the load deilcction
crude loss mechanism, the drag force increases both with curve. The particular tire that was being modeled here was
deflection and with inflation pressure, as it should. inflated to various pressures and loaded to obtain such
One advantage to plotting data in this fashion is that such curves. These results are compared with calculation in Fig.
constant speed plots eliminate some, but not all, of the dif- 10, where it is seen that predictions tend to be a little more
. ficulties of the problem of correcting the loss law for tem- accurate at lower deflections than at higher, which might
perature increaxs, and hence loss increases, as speed is in- be expected from such a linearized theory.
creased. By restricting attention to a constant speed, one
does not see these temperature effects quite so clearly. It
should also be noted that Fig. 7 does not contain any loss 7
from scrubbing in the contact patch, although this may be
a small factor in the overall picture. Fig. 7 is intended as 730 n 14 SIZE APPROX
a general presentation OF the type of information that can WITH VISCOUS LOSS LAW /
FIXE0 OEFLECTW I'
be obtained by calculation from this model, and should not
be interpreted as representing the characteristics of the gen- I
/
eral model.
In Fig. 8, the maximum contact pressures in the contact
patch are plotted as a function of rolling velocity for the
same two internal pressures as previously treated. The
results shown in Fig. 8 seem to indicate that at the usual
inflation of 24 psi, contact pressures would normally not
exceed 40 psi under ordinary driving conditions.
Fig. 9 shows plots of the contact pressure distribution in
the contact patch at two different speeds, 0 and 100 mph
for a single inflation pressure. The static pressure distribu-
tion is symmetric and almost rectangular. On the other
hand, the dynamic pressure distribution evaluated at 100
mph shows rather large differences between the peak pres- i
sure near the center of the contact patch and the inflation
10
pressure. In addition, the entire pressure distribution has
shifted forward. This causes a forward movement of the
center of pressure, which results in drag forces.
TIRE DRAG FORCE n DEFLECTON
FOR VARIOUS PRESSURES
?:SO I 14 m e oppm. PRESSURE DISTRIBUTION IN r so 14 SIZE IPPROX
Vllcoul lola lor CONTICT WTCU FOR TWO WITH VISCOUS LOSS L&W
Mmph SFJ- VELOCITIES
FIXED DEFLECTION 1.
'b' 24
I I , I ,
i
01 I I I I I I 1 I 1
0 0 2 04 06 0.e 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 z
DEFLECTION, INCHES
-
Fig. '7- Drag force as a function of speed



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
9
erated and also dictates to some extent the nature of the
contact patch shift as velocity increases. Therefore it should
be emphasized that users of this type of mathematical model
will probably find it necessary to generate their own indi-
1
vidual loss laws and to insert them into the appropriate
equations of this report. Only by this process will it be pos-
sible to obtain realistic tire performance data from a mathe-
matical model such as this.
REFERENCES
1. Y. Saito, "A Study of the Dynamic Steering Properties
of Pneumatic Tires, " 9th International Automobile Tech-
t
nical Congress, 1962, Published by the Institution of Me-
I chanical Engineers, London.
10
- DEFLECTION 2. K. R. Thorsen, "A Rational Method for Predicting Tire
Fig. 10 Static load deflection curves. experimen- Cornering Forces and Lateral Stiffness, " Boeing Airplane
tal versus calculated Company Report No. D-11719. 1951.
3. S. K. Clark, "An Analog for the Static Loading of a
In e- 1 it might be said that by use of the equations Pneumatic Tire, " The University of Michigan, Office of
discuJJbL iti~psa per, it is possible to calculate many of Research Administration, Report 02957 -19 -T, March 1964.
the in'lortant quantities dealing with the rolling of a pneu- 4. Wilhelm Fl;gge, "Stresses in Shells." Berlin: Spring-
matic tire in a straight line under constant velocity condi- er-Verlag. 1960.
tions. One very important characteristic in such calcula- 5. J. N. Goodier and J. K. McJvor, "The Elastic Cylin-
tions is the form of the loss law, since this determines almost drical Shell Under Heavily Uniform Radial Impulse." ASME
completely the general form of the drag forces that are gen- Paper No. 63, APMW -6, 1963.
This paper ir rubject to revision, Statements and opinions advanced published in Transactions, or in a Technical Progress or Advances in
in papers or discussion are the author's and are his responsibility. not Engineering volume. For permission to publish this paper in full or in
the Soclety's: however, the paper has been edited by SAE for uniform part, contact the SAE Publications Division and th-e authors.
styling and format. Dircusrion will be printed with the paper if it il 12 page booklet Prlntcd in U. S. A.
