=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
L O A N COPY: RETURN TO
qFWL TECHNICAL LIBRARY
KIRTLAND AFB, N. M.
THERMAL CONDUCTANCE OF
A N D HEAT GENERATION
IN TIRE-PAVEMENT INTERFACE
A N D EFFECT ON AIRCRAFT BRAKING
C. David Miller
Lewis Res,earch Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION WASHINGTON, [E. C. JANUARY 1976
B
I



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
TECH LIBRARY KAFB, NM
1I1111111111111ull1l1111lI11111111I1ll 1
I - -. I . .
1. Report No. 2. Government Accession No.
. - .--. -
6. Performing Organization Code
EFFECT ON AIRCRAFT BRAKING
~-
-_-
_.
7. Author(s) 8. Performing Organiza,tion Report No.
C. David Miller E-8357
-­
10. Work Unit No.
9. Performing~ O~~~ rganization Name and Address
505-08
Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute
11. Contract or Grant No.
Lewis Research Center
I
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
-. 13. Type of Report and Period Covered
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address ~
Technical Note
I National Aeronautics and Space Administration 1 14. Sponsoring Agency Code
Washington, D. C. 20546 I
- _ .
15 Supplementary Notes
. - - ~­
16. Abstract
A finite-difference analysis was performed on temperature records obtained from a free rolling
automotive tire and from pavement surface. A high thermal contact conductance between tire
4
and asphalt was found on a statistical basis, probably about 3x10 W/(m2)(K) or greater. Aver
age slip due to squirming between tire and asphalt was about 1. 5 mm. Consequent friction heat
was estimated as 64 percent of total power absorbed by bias-ply, belted tire. Extrapolation of
results to aircraft tire indicates potential braking improvement by even moderate increase of
heat absorbing capacity of runway surface.
I. .~. ..- __
17. Key Words (Suggested by Authorls)) 18. Distribution Statement
Heat conduction; Tires; Friction; Contact Unclassified - unlimited
conductance; Braking; Aircraft runway; Road STAR Category 05 (rev. )
resistance
. . . -



=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
THERMAL CONDUCTANCE OF AND HEAT GENERATION IN TIRE-PAVEMENT
INTERFACE AND EFFECT ON AIRCRAFT BRAKING
by C. David Miller
Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute
Lewis Research Center
SUMMARY
A finite-difference analysis was conducted on data provided by the University of
Michigan, which was obtained during research conducted under an NASA grant. The
data consisted of temperatures recorded by (1) thermocouples embedded within the tread
of a free-rolling automotive tire and (2) nickel-grid resistance thermometers cemented
to the pavement surface and traversed by the tire. Tires used were smooth-tread, bias-
ply, belted.
The analysis yielded values of heat generated by friction between the free-rolling
tire and the asphalt surface, heat generated by mechanical hysteresis of the rubber, and
a lower limit value of thermal contact conductance between tire and asphalt surface. An
average element of tread surface area on the tire for an automobile of intermediate
weight appeared to slide a total distance of 1. 5 mm during a single contact with the as­
phalt. The friction heat generated by this sliding accounted for about 64 percent of the
total road resistance after thermal equilibrium was reached. For the cold tire, the road
resistance was predominantly caused by hysteresis of the rubber. Thermal contact con­
4 2
ductance between the tire and asphalt was found to be about 3x10 W/(m )(K) or greater.
Extrapolation of the results to apply to an aircraft tire suggests that the local slippages
between a nonskidding aircraft tire and the runway could well generate enough heat to
soften the rubber and thus lower the level of braking force necessary to cause skid. It
is suggested that a moderate improvement of heat absorbing capacity of the runway sur­
face might substantially increase the maximum attainable braking effort.
INTRODUCTION
In theoretical study, conducted during the period 1970 to 1972, and concerned with
possible use of an aluminum skin on a runway surface for improvement of aircraft brak-



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
ing (ref. l), a need was encountered for a value of thermal contact conductance between
the tread of a rolling tire and the road, or runway, surface. The authors of reference 1
were unable to find such a value in the literature. Because of the unavailability of such
a value, the analysis reported in reference 1 had to be somewhat less complete than
desired.
During the same time period, under NASA grant NGR 23-005-417, research was
performed at the University of Michigan directed in part toward obtaining at least an
approximate value, or a limit value, of the thermal contact conductance. Parts of the
results of that research, monitored by the author of this report, were published in ref­
erence 2. Some of the data reported in reference 2 served as the basis for the analysis
reported here. The data used were of two types: (1) temperature records obtained from
thin-film sensors of very short response time, which were cemented to the pavement
surface, and over which the test tire rolled at 22.4 m/sec (50mph) and (2)temperature
records obtained from thermocouples embedded at different depths within the tread of
the rolling tire.
A finite-difference analysis of the heat flows necessary to create the temperature
histories indicated by the records obtained from the thin-film sensors was expected to
yield histories of (1) surface temperature of sensor, (2)surface temperature of rubber,
(3)rate of heat flow from rubber to sensor or the reverse, (4)heat flow into sensor
produced by friction within rubber-sensor interface, and (5)heat flow into rubber pro­
duced by friction within rubber-sensor interface. From the thermocouple readings
within the tire tread, the rate of heat generated by hysteresis within the tread could be
readily calculated. The sum of the heats generated by friction and by hysteresis could
be checked for agreement with the power necessary to overcome road resistance of the
tire.
From the results described, an approximate lower limit value could be deduced for
thermal contact conductance of the tire-sensor interface, which could be converted to a
value for the tire-asphalt interface. The rate of heat generation by sliding friction
within the interface could also be deduced.
With the thermal contact conductance even approximately known, the thermal as­
pects of the braking concepts described in reference 1 can be more accurately predicted.
Values of both the thermal contact conductance and the rate of heat generation by sliding
friction are basic information of interest to the tire industry.
U. S. Customary units were used for principal measurements and calculations and
then converted to SI units for reporting purposes.
After this report was written, but not yet published, and after the author's retire­
ment, an additional publication (ref. 3) came to his attention, which was also concerned
with research at The University of Michigan under NASA Grant NGR 23-005-417. Anal­
ysis and discussion of research data in reference 3 are pertinent to the subject matter
of this report. However, rather than to make extensive insertions into the body of this
2



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
report in consequence of reference 3, the author decided to treat that reference in an
appendix of this report.
SYMBOLS
total road surface area covered by tire tread per second, m2 (Personal com­
Ard
munication from R. J. Staples of the University of Michigan)
median of inner and outer surface areas of tread, 2858 cm2 (calculated)
Atr
2
inner surface area of tire tread, 2760 cm (less than outer surface area be­
*1
cause of smaller diameter) (Personal communication from R. J. Staples of
the University of Michigan)
outer surface area of tire tread, 2960 cm2 (Personal communication from
A2
R. J. Staples of the University of Michigan)
C specific heat, J/(g)(K)
specific heat of asphalt, 1.727 J/(g)(K) calculated from value of pas with
‘as
equation from ref. 4)
coefficient of friction
specific heat of nickel, 0.431 J/(g)(K) (ref. 5)
specific heat of polyimide, 1.094 J/(g)(K) (value supplied by manufacturer)
tread thickness, 23 mm (estimated from data in ref. 2)
rate of heat generation by friction per unit area within interface of rubber and
2
supporting surface relative to which it slides at time t, W/m
average rate of hysteretic heat generation within tread during time interval i,
*hi
W
average rate of flow of hysteretic heat out of tread during time interval i, W
Hoi
rate of flow of hysteretic heat out of tread at time j, W
Hoj
2
h thermal contact conductance between surfaces in contact, W/(m )(K)
reciprocal of contact resistance of asphalt surface as defined by eq. (22),
has
W/(m2) (Io
thermal contact conductance of interface between layers j and j + 1 for use
hj, j+l
2
in finite difference equation, W/(m )(K)
thermal contact conductance between polyimide and nickel grid in resistance
hp-ni
thermometers, 4800 W/(m2)(K) (calculated)
3



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
reciprocal of contact resistance of polyimide surface as defined by eqs. (20)
hpol
a.l-ld (21), W/(m2)(K)
reciprocal of contact resistance of rubber surface as defined by eqs. (20)
hrs
and (211, W/(m2)(K)
5, conductance factor defined by eq. (A5), W/K
jt-1
k thermal conductivity of an unspecified substance, W/(m)(K)
thermal conductivity of asphalt, 0. 111 W/(m)(K) (calculated from value of pas
kas
with equation from ref. 4)
thermal conductivity of material in layer j for use in finite difference equa­
tion, W/(m)(K)
thermal conductivity of nickel, 59. 5 W/(m)(K) (ref. 5)
thermal conductivity of polyimide, 0. 156 W/(m)(K) (value supplied by manu­
facturer)
thermal conductivity of tread rubber, 0.27W/(m)(K) (determined by a commer­
kr
cial testing laboratory)
thermal conductivity of rubber surface, 0. 14 W/(m)(K) (value for acrylonitrile
krs
butadiene styrene from ref. 6)
numerical value of slope of temperature curve at inner surface of tread at
1j
time j (fig. 14)
numerical value of slope of temperature curve at outer surface of tread at
m2j
time j (fig. 14)
2
P normal pressure between tread and supporting surface, N/m
road resistance to overcome friction between rubber and supporting surface, N
Rf
S average distance of slip, m
A Ti average temperature rise within tread during time interval i, K
t time, sec
At time interval between one time point and another in finite-difference equation,
sec
duration of time interval i, sec
time of start of contact of tire with sensor
surface temperature of unspecified material at time t, K
temperature of midpoint of layer j of unspecified material at time point n in
finite-difference equation, K
4



=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
surface temperature at time point n from finite difference solution
average temperature of polyimide surface during interval from time
point n to time point n + 1
average temperature of rubber surface during interval from time point
u ~r(,n , n+l)
n to time point n + 1
average temperature of surface of unspecified material during interval
from time point n to time point n + 1
temperature at distance x below surface of polyimide at time t,
O s x < . o , K
temperature at distance x below surface of rubber at time t,
O s x < . o , K
friction work, J
wf
Ax thickness of layer of material for use in finite-difference equation when
all layers are of same thickness, mm
thickness of layer j in finite-difference equation, mm
thickness of nth layer for finite-difference program, miii
2
thermal diffusivity of unspecified material, ni /sec
thermal diffusivity of asphalt, 6. 15X10-8 m2/sec (calculated)
thermal diffusivity of polyimide, 1. 0 0 4 ~ 1 0m- ~2,/sec (calculated)
thermal diffusivity of tread rubber, 1. ~ M O - m~ 2/’sec (determined by
commercia1 testing labor at ory)
3
P density of an unspecified substance, g;m
density of asphalt, 1. O45X1O6 g/m3 (average value from ref. 4)
Pas
density of nickel, 8. 9x106 g;m3 (ref. 5)
Pni
density of polyimide, 1. 42x10 6 g/m 3 (value supplied by manufacturer)
Ppol
constant rate of thermal flux through surface into unspecified material,
cp
w/m2
conductive thermal flux through contact conductance from polyimide sur­
face to rubber surface during interval from time point n to time point
n + 1, w/m 2
rate of generation of heat by friction during interval from time point n
to time point n + 1, w/m 2
5



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
average thermal flux through uppermost surface of polyimide in finite-
difference equation during interval from time point n to time point
+ 2
n 1, W/m
average thermal flux through outermost surface of rubber in finite-
difference equation during interval from time point n to time point
n + 1, W/m 2
rate of generation of heat by friction on rubber surface, according to
equivalent imaginary situation described in discussion of eq. (l),during
interval from time point n to time point n + 1, w/m 2
THERMAL ANALYSIS
It was possible to deduce much about the frictional heat generation within and flow
of heat through the interface of smooth-tread tires and pavement by analysis of records
from thin-film temperature sensors cemented to the pavement surface. Such analysis
made use of a finite-difference computer program. Within this program, the tread rub-
ber, the thin-film sensor, and the upper part of the underlying asphalt were subdivided
into imaginary layers. The heat flow from layer to layer and the heat generated on the
surface were then calculated.
Temperature records from thermocouples embedded within the tire tread were also
analyzed in a fairly conventional manner to determine heat generated by hysteresis.
Comparison of results of the two analyses, hopefully, might indicate that each re-
sult is of a reasonable magnitude, or that one or the other is not reasonable. The anal­
ysis of records from the thin-film sensors will be discussed first.
THERMAL BEHAVIOR OF TIRE-PAVEMENT INTERFACE
Figure 1is a reproduction of figure 7 of reference 2. It is a schematic sketch of a
temperature sensor (a resistance thermometer), four of which were cemented to the
pavement surface side by side. Only two were used. for the rec0rd.s that will be ana­
lyzed here. The centers of those two sensors were 63 mm apart on the pavement, in
the direction at right angles to that of tire movement. A nickel grid in each sensor,
0.005 mm thick, formed one continuous conductor. Changes in its temperature changed
its electrical resistance, which was continuously measured with a Wheatstone bridge
circuit, and recorded with a cathode-ray oscilloscope. The electrical system provided
approximately 98 percent response to a step function within 0.2 msec (private communi­
cation from R. J. Staples of The University of Michigan). The nickel grid was em­
6



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
bedded between an upper polyimide sheet of 0.0127mm thickness and a lower polyimide
sheet of 0.0254 mm thickness. The manufacturer of the sensors supplied values as
shown in the section SYMBOLS for the thermal properties of the polyimide, conductivity
kpol, density ppol, and specific heat cpol. From these values, the value of thermal
diffusivity as shown in the section SYMBOLS was computed.
(Y PO1
Temperature-time records from the nickel-grid sensors used in this analysis are
shown in figures 2 and 3, which were taken from reference 2. Test data for those
records were as shown in the tabulation in the following table:
Temper - Distance of Distance of Measured temper­
ature travel of tire sensor from atures, K
sensor in contact centerline of
Tire
with pavement tread during
surface surface
before touch- contact,
ing sensor, mm
Irm
2 0.03 or less 24 292.6 299.1
3 .03 or less 39 292.6 297.1 296.5
2 1.6 to 3.2 5 293.7 298.2 302. 1
4 3 3 1.6 to 3.2 58 293.7 298.2 302. 1
Tr s l nd 2 were made simultaneously by one and the same tire, as were -:aces 3
and 4. The tires used for the records of both figures 2 and 3 were standard automotive
tires, cross biased, belted, and designed to carry approximately 4450 N (1000 lb) load.
They traversed the sensors while bearing that load at 22.35 m/sec (50 mph). Inflation
5 2
pressure was 1.65X10 N/m (24 psi). The temperatures shown in the tabulation were
taken at the times of the tests or soon afterward. The road surface and tire surface
temperatures were measured with contact pyrometers.
The four records in figures 2 and 3 were analyzed by simple finite difference
methods in two stages. The first stage concerned itself only with the thermal fluxes
and temperatures (1) on the upper surfaces of the sensors, (2)within the polyimide and
nickel of the sensors, and (3) within the underlying asphalt. The second stage was con­
cerned with thermal flux and temperatures (1) on the surface of the tire, (2) within the
tire tread, and (3) on the upper surfaces only of the sensors. The first of these two
stages of the analysis will now be described.
7



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Thermal Fluxes and Temperatures in Nickel-Grid Sensors and Asphalt
Figure 4 is a greatly enlarged sectional view showing part of the interface between
tire tread and temperature sensor with an imaginary barrier between them to represent
thermal contact resistance. Also shown are interfaces between some of the layers into
which the materials were subdivided for the purpose of numerical analysis. All inter­
faces are seen in the figure on edge. Various entities that will be used in description of
the analysis are identified in this figure.
All parts of each nickel-grid sensor are assumed to have been at the same tempera­
ture at time to when the tire surface first came into contact with it. The problem
would be simpler if a history of thermal flux through the upper polyimide surface after
time to were known. If so, the resulting temperature-time records for all levels, in­
cluding both the upper polyimide surface and the nickel grid, could be calculated by the
finite-difference technique described in appendix A. But the problem here is the in­
verse. The temperature-time record of the nickel grid is given. The flux history
through the uppermost polyimide surface is unknown and needs to be found.
A flux history through the polyimide surface can be assumed. The resulting
temperature-time record of the nickel grid can be calculated. This result can be com­
pared with the given record, and the flux history can be revised in a manner designed to
reduce the difference. This procedure can be iterated, starting each iteration, not with
an assumed flux history, but with the revised flux history from the preceding iteration.
This iterative procedure involved the principal difficulty encountered in the analysis. An
automatic way was needed to modify the previously assumed or revised flux history that
would always cause the resulting nickel-grid temperature history to approach more
closely to the actual record throughout its length. The successful method that was de­
veloped and used will not be described here because it is of only academic interest rela­
tive to the purpose of this report. The flux histories that were eventually derived stand
on their own without regard to their method of derivation, because they do produce the
correct nickel-grid temperature histories by the finite-difference method.
Jnthe application of the finite-difference method to the problem of finding flux his­
tories, the values of conductivity, density, and specific heat given in the section SYM­
BOLS for nickel and polyimide were used (k, p, and c with subscripts ni and pol).
Substantially different values of the thermal constants for asphalt from those given in
the section SYMBOLS (kas, pas, and cas) were used. However, the results from oper­
ation of the program indicated that only negligible heat got through both layers of pol­
yimide and the nickel grid to the asphalt. So, when the values of the thermal constants
for asphalt were later corrected, it was thought to be useless to rerun the program.
In the operation of the finite-difference computer program, the upper layer of pol­
yimide, 0.0127 mm thick (see fig. l), was divided into five layers of uniform thickness,
as was the lower layer, 0.0254mm thick. The nickel grid was treated as a single
8



=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
layer, 0.005 mm thick, and was treated as a sheet rather than a grid. The upper part
of the asphalt underlying the sensor was divided into layers with uniform thiclmess of
0.0127 mm. As many layers were used as needed, for any particular run of the pro­
gram, so that the maximum variation of temperature of the lowest layer was not greater
than about 5 ~ 1 0 K- ~relative to the initial temperature assumed the same for all layers.
In early runs of the computer program, thermal resistance between either layer of
polyimide and the nickel grid was assumed to be zero (conductance infinite). In final
runs, however, for a reason that will be explained during description of the results of
the program, contact thermal conductance between polyimide and nickel grid, on each
side of the nickel grid, was taken as the value of hp-ni shown in the section SYMBOLS.
- - ~
The cement layer holding the sensor to the pavement was treated as infinitely thin and
as providing infinite conductance between polyimide and asphalt. Time increments for
which calculations were made were of uniform duration of 31.25 psec. Readings of
temperature levels from the four records shown in figures 2 and 3 were made, with use
of greatly enlarged copies of those figures, only for intervals of 125 psec. Hence, three
out of four of the temperature values used for the 31.25-psec intervals were interpo­
lated.
The results from the completed first stage of the analysis of the temperature rec­
ords seen in figures 2 and 3 are shown in figures 5 to 8. Curves relative to time are
shown in each of those figures for (1)temperature of the uppermost polyimide surface of
sensor, (2) thermal flux into sensor through uppermost polyimide surface, and (3) the
temperature of the nickel grid in the sensor. The curves for temperature of the nickel
grid are just enlarged tracings from the records shown in figures 2 and 3. The plotted
circular points are nickel grid temperatures calculated by the finite-difference program
from the curves of thermal flux through the uppermost surface of the sensor. A point is
plotted for each time at which the numerical value of the difference between the calcu­
lated temperature and the temperature previously read from the curve passed through a
maximum. In a few cases, additional points were plotted.
Note that the curves for thermal flux for traces 2, 3, and 4 (figs. 6 to 8) eventually
level off at a value substantially zero. They do so early enough to permit an assumption
that the tire left contact with the sensor at the point in time where such leveling off oc­
curred. For trace 1(fig. 5) fluctuations of thermal flux continued long after the tire
must have left contact, but eventually the flux did level off substantially at zero. The
flux traces in figures 5 and 7 both show some oscillations toward the ends of the traces
after having remained substantially level at zero for some distance. These oscillations
at the ends of the traces are thought to be due to an imperfection in the method of ad­
justment of the flux traces after each iteration of the computer program. It operated
well except near the end of each trace, where thousands of iterations would apparently
have been necessary for good convergence.
9



=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Eventual leveling of all flux curves at zero was made possible by the previously
2
mentioned assumption of a contact conductance of 4800 W/(m )(K) for each interface be­
tween nickel grid and polyimide. Thermal flux curves analogous to those of figures
5 to 8, not reproduced here, were obtained by computer runs with use of higher and
lower assumed values of this contact conductance. Such curves did not level off com­
pletely but appeared to approach zero asymptotically. From tire dimensions and vehicle
speed the tire must have left contact with the sensor at some time well within the dura­
tion of each record. Hence, the behavior of the flux curves with values of the contact
2
conductance greater or less than 4800 W/(m )(K) could not be realistic. The value of
2
4800 W/(m )(K) was therefore assumed to be approximately correct.
For trace 1 in figure 5, however, the fluctuations of thermal flux throughout the
time interval from about 8. 5 to about 16 msec must be presumed to be real, despite the
fact the tire must have left contact at about the beginning of this interval. Many possible
explanations exist. The oscillations could possibly be explained by simple errors in
reading of ordinates from the temperature trace in figure 2. The fact remains, how­
ever, that these oscillations do not exist for the other three traces. The ordinate read­
ings were made by the same person in the same manner. Perhaps the most probable
explanation is that some contamination existed between the tire surface and the surface
of the sensor. If such contamination were, for instance, a minute solid particle that
slid or rolled across the surface of the sensor for about 7. 5 msec after the tire left
contact, the oscillations of flux through the upper surface of polyimide would be ex­
plained. Also, such a particle could displace the tread rubber in such a way as to cause
a shorter than normal contact of rubber with the sensor surface, which may actually
have happened, as will be discussed later.
The authors of reference 2 found that the contact patch of the stationary tire under
load was about 14 cm (5. 5 in. ) long and concluded, therefore, that the duration of con­
tact must be 6.25 msec. But in all the plots of thermal flux through upper surface into
sensor in figures 5 to 8 the interval throughout which substantial fluctuations of flux
existed was obviously greater than 6.25 msec. It appears that hysteretic resistance to
changes in tread shape must have caused the contact patch to be appreciably longer than
14 cm (5. 5 in. ) for the rolling tire. An estimate of the actual duration of contact for
each of the four traces will be required later. Making of such estimates, however, will
be deferred until needed.
The appearances of all the thermal flux curves indicate a stick-slip condition be­
tween rubber and polyimide. When slip occurred, heat was generated sharply by fric­
tion, and high peaks occurred in the flux curves. When sticking occurred, no friction
heat was generated, and conduction of heat from polyimide to rubber caused sharp de­
clines or even negative fluxes into the polyimide through the uppermost surface.
The curves representing temperature of uppermost sensor surface and thermal flux
through uppermost surface of sensor, in conjunction with assumptions of (1)contact
10



=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
thermal conductance between polyimide and rubber and (2) initial temperature of rubber
relative to polyimide surface, are sufficient for calculation of the thermal history of the
rubber including temperatures and thermal fluxes at all depths, as well as rates of gen­
eration of heat by friction. At this stage no basis exists for either of the two assump­
tions required. However, the calculations can be made for each of a series of combina­
tions of the two assumptions, and the results may be analyzed for plausibility under the
various combinations of assumptions. Such a procedure and its results will now be dis­
cussed.
Thermal Fluxes and Temperatures of Tire Tread and Rates of
Generation of Heat by Friction
The second stage of analysis of the four records in figures 2 and 3, concerning heat
flow into the tire tread, was a more complex problem than the flow into the nickel-grid
sensors. The computational basis will now be described; then the computational results
will be presented.
Computational basis and theory for heat flow into tire tread. - Sharp temperature
~ ~~
gradients may be expected at very small depths into a surface element of the tire tread
during its contact with the pavement. It was assumed that these gradients will almost
completely disappear during the much longer time interval throughout which the surface
element is in contact only with air before the next contact with the pavement. During
this much longer period, the material very close to the surface loses heat both to the
air and to the rubber deeper under the surface. Loss of rubber from tread surface was
assumed negligible.
The finite difference method applied to the tire tread was a modified form of that
which was applied to the sensor in the first stage of the analysis. Details are described
in appendix A. In keeping with the content of the preceding paragraph, uniform initial
temperature of rubber was assumed as in the application of the method to the tempera­
ture sensor. The necessary modifications were due to the need for including the effect
of thermal contact conductance between polyimide and rubber and the need for separating
the effects of conductive heat flux through the polyimide-rubber interface from the ef­
fects of heat generated by friction within the interface.
A theoretical equation, analytically derived in reference 1, was used for the separa­
tion of conductive heat flux from the heat generated by friction. A one-dimensional form
of that equation is
x = o



=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
where krs is thermal conductivity of the rubber surface, ur(x, t) and u (x, t) are tem­
PO1
peratures within or on the surface of rubber and polyimide, g(t) is the rate of heat gen­
eration by friction, and h is thermal contact conductance. (Derivation of this equation
in ref. 1required the assumption that asperities on the rubbing surfaces remained in
contact long enough that steady-state conditions would exist within each asperity through­
out most of the contact time. Unfortunately, that assumption was not stated in ref. 1.)
This equation says that the nature of heat generation and flow is equivalent to an imag­
inary situation in which two processes occur simultaneously: (1)heat generation by
friction occurs independently on each of the two rubbing surfaces in proportion to the
conductivities of the materials and (2) heat flows from one surface to the other at a rate
determined by their temperature difference and the contact conductance in the same way
as if the two materials were not sliding relative to each other.
It is shown in reference 1that equation (1) applies without regard to the presence of
microscopic areas within which the materials are separated by contaminants, provided
only negligible heat is generated by friction in the sliding of either material on contami­
nant or in shearing action within the contaminant itself. In application of equation (1)
here, it was assumed that sliding of carbon black over polyimide would involve neglig­
ible friction as compared with the sliding of rubber over polyimide. It was also assumed
that grains of carbon black on the tread surface would tend to be lost quickly from the
rubber matrix. For those reasons, the surface conductivity of tread krs was taken as
0. 14 W/(m)(K) or 0.08 Btu/(ft)(hr)(OF) rather than a considerably higher value kr that
would apply to the tread rubber containing a large quantity of carbon black. This value
is the minimum given for a rubber-like plastic (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene) in ref­
erence 6. The lowest supportable value was used because its use reduced to a minimum
a theoretical anomaly in the overall results, which will be mentioned in the discussion of
those results. Use of the value of krs in equation (1)rather than kr is speculative.
However, as will be explained in discussion of results, use of the value krs is thought
to be conservative in relation to the most important of the results obtained. For the
tread rubber exclusive of its surface, that is, for all purposes except use in equation (l),
the conductivity kr was taken as 0.28 W/(m)(K). Thermal diffusivity of the rubber cyr
was taken as 1.18X10-7 m2/sec. After this study was completed, actual tests by a com­
mercial testing laboratory on the tread rubber indicated conductivity of 0.27 W/(m)(K)
and diffusivity of 1. llX10-7 m2/sec. These differences were believed too small to
justify repeating the work.
In use of the finite-difference computer program for the tread the thickness of the
nth layer from the surface was
79
12



=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
This equation gives a thickness of 2 . 5 4 ~ 1 0 -c~m in.) for the surface layer and a
thickness of 0.025 cm (0.01 in. ) for the 80th layer, with a logarithmic gradation of
thickness from layer to layer. The total thickness for the 80 layers was 0.444 cm
(0. 175 in. ). However, only eight layers with a total thickness of about 2. 5 1 ~ 1 0 -cm~
(about 9. in. ) were actually used because the program was only allowed to run
deep enough to involve a temperature change greater than about 5 ~ 1 0 K- ~(about
OF)
in the deepest layer.
This second-stage analysis, of course, should not be conducted over more than the
time interval throughout which the tire tread is judged to have been in contact with the
sensor, though appreciable inaccuracy in estimation of beginning and end of contact did
not appear to have a large effect on the end result. The following reasoning and proce­
dure were adopted to resolve the problem of estimation of duration of contact:
(1)For each of the four flux curves (figs. 5 to 8), the beginning of contact was taken
as being at the time of the first sharp rise of the flux curve above approximately zero
value. The results were 1.25, 1.75, 0.75, and 1.625 msec for traces 1 to 4, respec­
t ively .
(2) It was recognized that trace 1 would have to be treated as a special case in es­
timating the time of the end of contact.
(3) Among the other three traces, it was reasoned that trace 4 should have involved
the shortest contact time and trace 2 the next shortest, because of the relative distances
of the sensors from the centerline of the tire tread during contact.
(4) It was recognized that some subjectivity might exist in favor of a long contact,
with consequent great flow of heat through the tire-sensor interface, because the prin­
cipal purpose of the analysis was concerned with the concept of improving aircraft brak­
ing by use of a runway surface having a high thermal conductivity.
(5) To counter such possible subjectivity, it was decided to take the interval of con­
tact for trace 4 as being as short as reasonably tenable. Hence, as shown in figure 8,
the end of contact was taken as the time of passage of thermal flux through zero just
after the third highest of the peak values, at 9.35 msec, giving a contact duration of
7.725 msec.
(6) The interval of contact for trace 2 was made as short as it reasonably could be
made while still being no less than the interval of contact for trace 4. This criterion
placed the end of contact as shown in figure 6 at the first crossing of the zero level of
the thermal flux curve later than 9. 5 msec, which was at 9. 75 msec, giving trace 2 a
contact interval of 8.0 msec.
(7) The same procedure was followed for trace 3 in comparison with trace 2. The
result was termination of contact at 9. 125 msec as shown in figure 7, giving a contact
interval of 8.375 msec.
(8) As earlier mentioned, it was recognized that if the anomalies in trace 1were
due to a hard contaminating particle, it could displace the tread rubber in a manner to
13



=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
cause a shorter than normal contact of rubber with the sensor surface.
(9) It was assumed that the general pattern of sticking and slipping between tire
tread and supporting surface would be roughly the same in all cases. The flux curves
for traces 1and 3 are more similar than for 1and 2 or for 1and 4. It was observed
that the thermal flux curves for traces 1and 3 both showed a fairly uniform flux for a
period of about 2 msec during the middle portion of the contact interval. At the end of
this period, peaks and valleys were compared in the two records as indicated by the
numbers adjacent to those peaks and valleys in the figures. This comparison led to the
placing of the end of contact for trace 1at 8.75 msec, giving a contact duration of
7. 5 msec. It was considered that this result could well be wrong, but, at least, in com­
parison with the more firmly justified contact intervals for the other traces, this result
is cautious in relation to the type of possible subjectivity mentioned earlier.
Computational r e E l t s for tiretread, including tire-sensor interface. - Of the many
-
runs of the finite-difference computer program as applied to the tire surface, only four
crucial examples are shown in detail, in figures 9 to 12. Shown in each figure, through­
out the contact duration, are (1)the temperature of the rubber surface relative to the
initial temperature of the polyimide surface (referred to hereafter as rubber surface
temperature), (2) the temperature of the rubber surface relative to the simultaneous
temperature of the polyimide surface (referred to hereafter as relative rubber surface
temperature), (3) conductive heat flux from polyimide surface to rubber surface (re­
ferred to hereafter as conductive flux), and (4) rates of generation of heat by friction on
surfaces according to earlier described model representing equation (1)(referred to
hereafter as rubber friction heat, polyimide friction heat, and total friction heat). Be­
cause the relative friction heat between the two surfaces is analytically treated as pro­
portional to conductivities, one curve suffices for all, but with three different scales.
Figures 9 and 10 are for trace 1with assumed contact conductances of 11 345 and
56 744 W/(m2)(K) or 2000 and 10 000 Btu/(ft2)(hr)('F), respectively. Figures 11and 12
are for the same respective contact conductances, but for trace 2.
Each figure is also for an assumed initial rubber temperature. However, in each
case that assumed initial value was reached as a result of numerous repetitions of the
entire computer program. An initial value was sought that would result in satisfaction
of the conditions that friction heat could never be negative and that friction heat should
go to zero at least once and probably several times during the contact interval because
of the stick-slip condition. In figure 9, for example, negative values appear in the plot.
However, they are only at the minima of sharp downward excursions. It could not be
hoped that those minima would be accurate because the nature of the solution is stepwise
rather than continuous. What was actually sought was that the lowest average of any
five consecutive values of total friction heat should be zero within an arbitrary small
2
value of *315 W/m (about 100 13tu/(ft2)(hr)). An average of five consecutive values was
used because that number proved to be most satisfactory for meeting the conditions that
14



=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
the average should go substantially to zero several times without ever going substan­
tially negative. The time interval represented by the five consecutive values may well
have approximated the time interval most often covered by a sticking condition. For
each complete run of the program for an assumed initial rubber temperature, both
that initial temperature and the minimum average of five consecutive values of fric­
tion heat were recorded. After the second such run, new assumed values were chosen
by interpolation or extrapolation relative to the two previous values until the desired
accuracy was achieved.
We may now make several evident observations about the plots in figures 9 to 12.
In each case the relative rubber surface temperature quickly rises to a level at which it
remains fairly constant throughout the rest of the contact interval. The conductive flux
quickly drops to a value at which it stays roughly constant, although with the higher
value of contact conductance there is a substantial response of the conductive heat flux
to peaks and valleys of the heat generation curve. Finally, for a given trace, the gen­
eral level of both the conductive heat flux and the friction heat are nearly independent of
the assumed value of contact conductance throughout the range of values used. These
observations apparently mean, for the values of contact conductance assumed
(1) The difference between rubber and polyimide surface temperatures, after the
initial transient condition, is almost solely that required to transmit heat from polyi­
mide to rubber because of the fact the rubber was initially cooler than the polyimide.
The contact apparently does not last long enough for this heat flux to diminish appreci­
ably. Hence, an approximately constant temperature difference is involved in driving
this heat through the contact resistance.
(2) Rapid fluctuation of friction heat, distributed between the two surfaces accord­
ing to equation (l),causes almost identical rapid fluctuations of surface temperatures
of rubber and polyimide.
The following equation is of interest regarding the observation that rapidly fluctuat­
ing temperatures of rubber and sensor surfaces remain always nearly the same:
(,y2
u(0, t) = 2 (3)
k
This equation is given by Carslaw and Jaeger (ref. 7) for a semi-infinite solid, initially
at uniform zero temperature, subjected to a uniform flux through its surface. The sym­
bol u(0, t) represents the surface temperature at time t from the start of the flux, k
is the conductivity of the material, cp is the flux, and is the diffusivity of the mate­
(Y
rial. For the special case covered by this equation, to get the same temperature on
both surfaces at the end of any time interval during contact we may equate right sides
of equation (3) for rubber and polyimide and solve for qr/cppol, where cp, and qpol
are fluxes into rubber and polyimide, respectively. That is,
15



=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
But qr/qpol according to equation (4)is nearly the same as kr/kpol, because a,
PO1
and or are nearly the same. But equation (1) distributed the friction heat according
to the ratio krs/kpol, not the ratio kr/kpol. The observation that the rapidly fluctuat­
ing temperatures of the two surfaces always remained about the same, therefore, im­
plies that all the assumed values of contact conductance were so low that it really mat­
tered little whether kr or krs was used for the operation of the finite-difference
program.
None of the observations mentioned appear to be of any value in estimating the cor­
rect value of contact conductance.
In figure 13 are plotted the most significant of the results obtained from not only
the four computer runs of figures 9 to 12, but from 18 other runs also. In figure 13 all
points are plotted against the assumed value of contact conductance between polyimide
and rubber that was used for the pertinent computer run. Values plotted for each trace
are (1) initial rubber temperature, (2) average conductive flux throughout interval of
contact, and (3) average friction heat. An anomaly exists for trace 2 at an assumed
4 2
contact conductance of about 3.8X10 W/(m )(K). All the plotted points for that computer
run are out of line with the other plotted values for trace 2. The program was rerun for
4 4
contact conductances of about 3.35X10 and 3.95X10 W/(m2)(K). These runs yielded
values that did fall in line with the other points. It was believed the anomaly was not too
serious and the problem was resolved by a decision to use the two sets of values at
4 4 2
3.35~10 and 3 . 9 5 ~ 1 0 W/(m )(K) and ignore the anomalous solution.
Statistical Indication of Slip Pattern Within Contact Area Between Tire and Pavement
The ascending order for curves of average friction heat in figure 13 is the same as
the ascending order of distances from tread centerline, namely, traces 3, 1, 2, and 4.
We will examine this relation for its implication regarding the pattern of slip within the
entire contact area between tire and pavement.
4
We will consider here a median contact conductance in figure 13 of about 3.2X10
2
W/(m )(K). We will assume that all elements of rubber surface will slide during con­
tact through the same distance s1 in the direction of vehicle motion, regardless of
their distance from the tread centerline. (See fig. 1and discussion of that figure in
ref. 1.) We will assume that each element also will slide in the direction at right angles
to that of vehicle motion, through a distance ast, where 6 is the distance from the
tread centerline and st is a constant. This model seems reasonable. There is no ob­
16



=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
vious way that the distance from the tread centerline can greatly affect the longitudinal
slip sl. The transverse slip 6st must be zero at the tread centerline (6 = 0) because
of symmetry. It seems reasonable to suppose that the transverse slip would increase
with the distance 6, though not necessarily proportionally as assumed in this model.
According to this model, the total slip distance will be
We will use a simplifying approximation that contact pressure is uniform throughout the
contact area. Then the friction heat should be proportional to s of equation (5).
If we use for 6 in equation (5) the distances of the sensors from the tread center-
line for traces 1 to 4 in millimeters, and we make st = 0.05 sl, we find from equa­
tion (5) for traces l, 2, 3, and 4, respective slip distances of l. 56 si, 2. 10 sl, l.03 sL,
and 3.07 sl. The correlation coefficient between these values of s and the average
4 2
friction heat at contact conductance of 3.2X10 W/(m )(K) is approximately 0. 986.
The linear correlation coefficient between two variables x and y is defined as
nu u
X Y
where 2 and 7 are the average values of the x and y variables, n is the number of
values of each of the variables within the sample, and ux and are the standard de­
(5
Y
viations of x and y. Equation (6) is equivalent to
- ­
r = V x . Vy (7)
-
where V, and ? are unit vectors in n-dimensional space defined as
Y
and
17
- 1 -. ... .. - .. . -.-.. ... . . .. ...... ..........



=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
and where Ti (i = 1 to n) are a set of mutually orthogonal unit vectors spanning the
n-dimensional space. Thus the correlation coefficient r is the cosine of the angle be­
tween the vectors V, and V 4 with a maximum value of 1 when the two vectors are
Y’
identical.
In reference 8 a distribution function (eq. (C17)) was derived for p, the cosine of
the angle between two vectors in n-dimensional space, under the assumption that each
vector is as likely to extend in any one direction as any other within the n-dimensional
space. For four-dimensional space that equation is
-1
where 8 = cos p.
For the value of r = 0.986, 8 = cos-% = 0. 1675. Equation (lo), then, gives us
F(r) = 0.998. This result suggests that the probability is only 1 - 0.998 = 0.002 that
a correlation coefficient with numerical value as great as 0.986 would have occurred
accidentally.
This evidence, with only one sample of four values, is not sufficient to prove the
validity of the model proposed. But it seems sufficient to commend further future in­
vestigation. Note that, if this model is correct, the slip at 6 = 58 mm is more than
three times as great as the slip at the tread centerline.
Deduction of Value for Thermal Contact Conductance Between Tire
Tread and Polyimide Surface
The original plan was that contact conductance would be determined directly from
figure 13 because the curves for initial rubber temperature for traces 1 and 2 would
cross at an abscissa value that could be taken as the correct contact conductance. The
tire that produced these two traces had been in contact with the road for only a few revo­
lutions. The two points on the tread surface that touched the two sensors were expected
to have been closely at the same temperature before contact. At each of those points,
the heat on the tread surface at the end of contact with the road surface would have sub­
stantial time to flow deeper into the tread before the next contact. Hence, it was thought



=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
that the two points should have been at temperatures not far apart at the beginning of
contact for traces 1 and 2.
Not only did the two curves fail to cross, but it is obvious that, even if they had
crossed, they would have done so at an angle so acute that the crossing could not have
been depended upon for an accurate determination of contact conductance. The earlier
mentioned choice of the lowest supportable value of krs was made because that value,
krs = 0. 14 W/(m)(K), brought the two curves closer together than did any higher value
of krs.
Besides the failure of curves for initial rubber temperatures for traces 1 and 2 to
cross, a momentarily disturbing observation was that the curves for initial rubber tem­
perature for the four traces appear in almost reverse order to that of the curves for
average friction heat. This fact suggests a high negative correlation coefficient between
initial rubber temperature and average friction heat.
The correlation coefficients were computed for the various values of contact con­
ductance and are set forth in the following table:
Contact Correlation coef­
zonductance, ficient between
W/b2)(K) initial rubber
temperature and
friction heat
I.2x10~ -0.84
-.
1.7 82
-.
2.6 80
-.
3.8 77
-.
5.7 74
.
These negative coefficients have considerably higher numerical values than would
ordinarily be expected to occur accidentally. However, the accidental occurrence of a
negative or positive correlation coefficient of such magnitude would be by no means
unique.
The working of the computer program should be expected to produce a false negative
correlation if the assumed value of contact conductance were too low. The low contact
conductance would hinder the flow of heat to the rubber and the operation of the program
would force a finding of an initial rubber temperature too low in order that the rubber
could absorb more friction heat. It was even hoped for a time to use this fact as an aid
toward deducing the correct value of contact conductance. But the tabulation shows that
the negative correlations are affected only slightly by the assumed contact conductance.
19



=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
No conceivable cause and effect would seem to explain the negative correlation
other than too low an assumed contact conductance. Hence, before any further attempt
is made to deduce a plausible value of contact conductance from the results it is neces­
sary to examine this negative correlation for its possible reflection on the validity of
the computational results. A question naturally arises as to whether a false negative
correlation may have been created because of some flaw in the computer program.
Accidental negative correlations may be considered as plausible if we can show that
the distributions of initial rubber temperature for the four traces and the distributions
of friction heat, as they appear in figure 13, are independently plausible. We have al­
ready shown that the friction heat correlates almost perfectly with a reasonable model.
Hence, this distribution seems to be independently plausible.
So we will now take up the question of independent plausibility of the computed values
of initial rubber temperatures as they appear in figure 13. We cannot formulate a
theory that will provide almost perfect correlation with these computed values as we did
for the values of friction heat. However, we can show qualitatively that the distribution
of the computed values may well be due to other causes than a flaw of the computer pro­
gram.
Qualitatively, a large negative correlation coefficient may be expected between two
sets of variables if the values in the two sets tend to appear in reverse order. In fig­
ure 13 we see that the order of descending values of initial rubber temperature is
trace 3, trace 1, trace 4, and trace 2. The descending order for average friction heat
is trace 4, trace 2, trace 1, and trace 3. Hence, six possible comparisons of order of
pairs of values between the two sets are as follows:
Traces in Traces in
reverse order same order
l a n d 2 2 a n d 4
l a n d 3
l a n d 4
2 and3
3 and4
The five pairs of traces in the left column favor a negative correlation coefficient. The
one pair of traces in the right column favor a positive coefficient.
We will first consider traces 1and 2. After the disappointing failure of the curves
to cross became apparent, it soon became clear by simple inspection of figure 2 that the
traces indicate (correctly or not) a lower initial rubber temperature for trace 2. The
overall drop in indicated temperature of the nickel grid, from the beginning to the end of
trace 1, is about 0.068 K. The corresponding temperature drop for trace 2 is about
0.11 K, nearly twice that for trace 1. And the sensor for trace 2 was 62.5 percent
farther from the tread centerline than the sensor for trace 1, so that friction heat should
20



=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
have been greater and the initial rubber temperature should have been hotter, unless
there was a substantial differential air cooling.
It seems clear, therefore, that either there was a substantial difference of air
cooling or some mismatch existed between the two sensors and their associated equip­
ment, which gave the sensor for trace 2 much greater sensitivity than that for trace 1.
The reverse order for these two traces could conceivably be due to one or the other of
these conditions rather than to a flaw in the computer program.
The truck, at the rear of which the tire under test was mounted when the records
of figures 2 and 3 were obtained, had numerous large appurtenances just in front of the
tire. These appurtenances, collectively, almost amounted to a vertical wall in a plane
perpendicular to the direction of motion. For this reason, it is possible that the prin­
cipal organized motion of air relative to the tire was that due to the centrifugal pumping
action of the rotating tire and the wheel on which it was mounted. Air flow caused by
this pumping action would spiral outward from the axis of rotation along both side walls.
Such air flow would cause more rapid cooling of the edges than the centerline of the
tread. For each of the two traces recorded by sensor 1 (traces 1 and 3) the sensor was
substantially closer to the tread centerline than for the corresponding traces recorded
by sensor 2 (traces 2 and 4).
A mismatch between the two sensors and their associated equipment of sufficient
magnitude seems most unlikely. Even at the highest value of contact conductance in fig­
ure 13, the curves of initial rubber temperature for traces 1 and 2 are separated by
about 1.36 K (2.44' F). The curves have become nearly horizontal in this region of
contact conductance and it seems they should not approach each other much more closely
at higher values of the abscissa for which computations were not run.
Such a difference in air cooling seems much more reasonable than that the differ­
ence should be explained by a sensor mismatch. Each element in the tread surface
spends more than 10 times as long being cooled by air as it spends in contact with the
pavement. As indicated earlier, the computer program only ran to a depth of
2. 5 1 ~ 1 0 -cm~ (about 9 . 9 ~ 1 0 i-n~. ) in the rubber because only negligible heat reached
that depth during contact with the sensor. Hence, air cooling would only have to extend
to that same depth to affect the operation of the computer program.
Hence, it seems plausible that the computed initial rubber temperatures as shown
in figure 13 may be correct and that the failure of the curves for traces 1 and 2 to cross
is due to differential air cooling.
The same kind of differential air cooling should be expected to make the initial rub­
ber temperature for trace 4 lower than that for trace 3. The distances from tread
centerline were 5 mm for trace 3 and 58 mm for trace 4. Except for the differential
air cooling, the initial rubber temperature should unquestionably have been higher for
trace 4 than for trace 3, rather than lower. The differential air cooling may even have
put traces 1 and 4 out of their expected order. The tire for trace 4 had been running on
21



=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
the pavement under load for 1.6 to 3.2 km while that for trace 1 had been in contact with
the pavement for only about 30 m.
Because of the great distance of travel of the tire on the pavement for trace 3 and
short distance for traces 1 and 2, and the fact trace 3 at a distance of only 5 mm from
tread centerline may have had the least effective air cooling, the orders of traces 1
and 2 relative to trace 3 may be just as they should be.
So it is seen that all the six comparisons shown in the tabulation are either as they
were expected to be or may possibly be explained by differential air cooling. The large
negative correlations between initial rubber temperature and the friction heat do call for
very careful scrutiny of the computer program, which was actually given to the program.
But in view of the possibility that has now been explained, that the order of calculated
values of initial rubber temperature is correct, the large negative correlations should
demand nothing more than the careful scrutiny of the computer program.
It now seems that choosing a valid contact conductance from examination of the
curves for initial rubber temperature in figure 13 is just a matter of how much air cool­
ing one is willing to believe. To calculate exactly how much air cooling should occur
would be enormously complex and could not be undertaken as part of the program being
4 2
reported here. At the contact conductance of 1.2X10 W/(m )(K), for trace 2, we would
have to assume that the tire surface was cooled by the air to a lower temperature than
the 292 K air temperature itself. For trace 4, with a tire tread heated by a substantial
distance of running on the pavement, we would have to assume cooling to within 0. 5 K
of the air temperature. Whether or not appreciable air cooling is believed, such low
initial rubber temperatures could not really have existed and no reason is seen to doubt
either the accuracy of the records or the validity of the computer program. Hence this
value of conductance is clearly unreasonably low even if no appreciable air cooling is
4
assumed. The initial rubber temperatures at the contact conductance of 5.7X10
2
W/(m )(K) seem most reasonable of any that appear in the curves.
It appears that the curves indicate a contact conductance certainly higher than
4 2 4
1.2xlO W/(m )(K) and possibly as high as or higher than 5.7X10 W/(m2)(K). For
4 2
later use in calculations a value of 3x10 W/(m )(K) will be used. This is a very high
conductance for solids in contact. A conductance of this order of magnitude probably
exists only because the rubber under pressure deforms to make molecular contact over
a large fraction of the supporting surface in spite of asperities on that surface.
It may now be seen that the use of krs = 0.14 W/(m)(K) instead of krs = kr = 0.27
w/(m)(K) was cautious. For the same assumed contact conductance, if we assume the
calculated friction heat unchanged, the higher value of krs would call for more heat
generation on the rubber side of the interface (according to the imaginary model of
eq. (1)). Operation of the computer program then would (actually did) call for lower
initial rubber temperatures, which would force us to go to higher abscissas in figure 13
to find reasonable initial rubber temperatures. Thus our conclusion about contact con­
22



=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
ductance would have been higher. But the calculated friction heat would also have been
higher. A smaller fraction of this friction heat would have appeared on the polyimide
side of the interface. Operation of the computer program would consequently have
called for more friction heat in order to explain the temperatures of the nickel grid. So
it seems that we would have found higher values of both contact conductance and friction
heat with krs = kr = 0.27 W/(m)(K).
Total Friction Heat and Contribution to Road Resistance
From the cautiously estimated contact intervals for the four temperature traces,
the average friction heats shown in figure 13, the vehicle velocity, the tire tread width,
the normal load on the tire, and an assumed coefficient of friction, we may easily esti­
mate the total rate of heat generation by friction, the road resistance required to gen­
erate that heat, and the average total distance of sliding for all elemental surface areas
of the tire relative to the pavement. The vehicle velocity from reference 2 was 22.35
2 2
m/sec (50 mph). From the stationary footprint area of 0.0191 m (29.6 in. ) and
length of 0. 14 m (5. 5 in. ) given in reference 2, we get a tread width of 0. 137 m. The
tire load given in reference 2 was 4448 N (1000 lb). A friction coefficient of 1.0 will be
assumed. This may be a high value for sliding friction, but a high value is conservative
relative to the average sliding distance that will be calculated. The total rate of heat
generation by friction for each trace will be taken from figure 13 at contact conductance
4 2
of 3x10 W/(m )(K). The results for each trace will be treated as applying over one-
quarter of the total tread width. On the basis that has now been described, computa­
tional results are as follows:
Trace Contact Distance of Average fric- Total rate
interval, contact, tion heat, of heat gen­
msec m W/m2 eration by
friction,
W
7.500 0. 168 2. 34x104 134.6
.
8.000 179 4.39 260.1
.
8.375 187 1.61 103.1
7.725 . 173 5. 76 341.2
The distance of contact in column 3 was determined from the contact duration of
column 2 and the vehicle speed. The values in the last column are products of average
23



=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
friction heat and contact area for the specific trace. The total of the values in the last
column is the total rate of heat generation, 848 W. The estimated total footprint area
from the values in column 3 and the footprint width of 0. 137 m is 0.02421 m2.
We may now get an approximate value of the road resistance necessary to generate
the friction as
power - 848
R - - - = 37.9 N (8. 52 lb)
- velocity 22.35
The total road surface area contacted per second, the tread width times velocity, is
3.062 m 2 . With the approximation that contact pressure between tire and pavement is
uniform, the friction work of 848 J performed in a second must be
where A is the total road surface area covered by the tire tread per second,
2rd
,
3.062 m p is the normal pressure, 4448 N (1000 lb) divided by the footprint area of
0.02421 m
2,
cf is the assumed coefficient of friction, and s is the average distance
slipped during contact in meters. The average slip distance required by equation (12) is
1. 5 mm (0.06 in. ). This average distance slipped is three times as great as was meas­
ured in scratch-plate tests reported in reference 2. In those tests small particles of
abrasive were between a tire tread and an aluminum plate as the tire was rolled over the
plate. The total lengths of scratches in the aluminum plate, caused by the abrasive
particles, were measured. This method required an assumption that aluminum particles
did not slip, or roll, at all relative to the rubber surface. It would seem one could as
well make the assumption that the particles would tend to move more relative to the rub­
ber surface than relative to the aluminum surface. The authors of reference 2 recog­
nized this limitation on the accuracy of their result, and presented the result only as a
lower limit of distance slipped.
Both the 37.9-N component of road resistance and the average slip distance of
1.5 mm seem quite reasonable. However, greater confidence in the results will be
possible if the 37.9-N road resistance should prove to be compatible with an independent
estimate of the component of road resistance required to overcome rubber hysteresis.
That independent estimate may be made quite simply with use of thermocouple measure­
ments of temperatures within a tire tread, as will be discussed next.
Heat Generation by Hysteresis Within Tread
Figure 14 is a reproduction of figure 5 of reference 2, modified only by changes of
units and omission of information not pertinent to the present discussion. It shows the
24



=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
temperatures indicated by six thermocouples embedded within the crown of the tire
tread at the depths indicated by the circular symbols, and by a single thermocouple at­
tached to the inner surface of the crown. The thermocouple on the inner surface be­
came inoperative after 240 sec and before 480 sec from the start of the run. The ther­
mocouple embedded at a depth of 19 mm (0.75 in. ) from the inner surface stopped
operating after 720 sec and before 960 sec from the start of the run.
By inspection of figure 14 we may see that, in spite of the loss of two thermo­
couples, approximate average temperature rises within a time interval may be found by
averaging the changes in temperatures indicated by the five thermocouples throughout
-
the test. From the average temperature rise for the entire tread thickness AT: for
1
time interval i, the difference between the average rate of hysteretic heat generation
and the average rate of flow of heat out of the tread may be estimated as
kr ATi
Atr
Hhi - H . S d--
01 CYr Ati
where Hhi is the average rate of hysteretic heat generation, Hoi is the average rate
of flow out of the tread, Atr is the total surface area of the tread (average of inside
and outside areas), d is tread thickness, and ti is the length of the time interval.
Estimation of the rate of flow of heat out of the tread is somewhat hampered by the
irregular behavior of the thermocouple at the depth of 19 mm and the loss of the thermo­
couple on the inner surface. Early in the test the thermocouple at 19-mm depth showed
a more rapid temperature rise than any other, but later in the test it showed a slower
rise. Apparently we may take its erratic behavior as being an indication of its impend­
ing failure and disregard all of its indications. For the records at 40, 100, 180, and
240 seconds, we may observe that the thermocouple at the inner surface and the two
thermocouples at depths of 7 and 9 mm showed temperatures approximately linear with
depth. An assumption will be made here that such condition would have continued if the
surf ace thermocouple had remained operative.
On such a basis, estimates may be made of the numerical value of the slope of
each temperature curve in figure 14 for each time j after the start of the test at the
inner surface, my, and at the outer surface, m2j. From these numerical values of
slopes, the flow of heat out of the tread may be estimated as
Hoj r kr(Almlj + Azmzj)
where A1 is the inner surface area of the tread and A2 is the outer surface area.
For the nine temperature curves in the figure (j = 1to 9), the application of equation (14)
yields values shown in table I for H with use of a total tread inner surface area
oj
25



=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
A1 = 2760 cm
2,
and total tread outer surface area A2 = 2960 cm2.
For use in equation (13), we may now use from table I the average of the two values
of Hoj at the beginning and end of the ith time interval. That is, if i = 1 corresponds
to the time interval between the curves for j = 0 and j = 1, i = 2 corresponds to the
interval between the curves for j = 1 and j = 2, and so on, then, for use in equa­
tion (13),
Accordingly, with use of equations (13) and (15) and table I, approximate rates of
hysteretic heat generation Hhi for the median times of the various time intervals i
were calculated and listed in table 11. For the calculations the median value of tread
area was A = 2858 cm 2 . The tread thickness was 23 mm. Also entered in table I1 are
the forces that must exist as drags on the motion of the wheel at the test speed 22.4
m/sec, to provide the energy consumed by the tread hysteresis.
The hysteresis-induced drag forces shown in table I1 are plotted relative to time
from start of test in figure 15. A smooth curve in the figure approximately represents
the results. The drag force due to tread hysteresis is apparently three to four times as
great for the cold tire as it is for the tire that has approached equilibrium thermal con­
ditions after about 1000 sec of running at the test speed. Presumably a similar change
in drag due to sidewall hysteresis would also occur.
In reference 2, a hysteresis-induced drag of about 89 N (-20 lb) was estimated on a
thermal basis for the entire tire. This determination, however, applied to the time in­
terval from 40 to 60 sec after the start of the test. Under the assumption that the reduc­
tion of hysteresis in the sidewalls would be proportional to that of the tread, and by com­
parison of the 40- to 60-sec region in figure 15 to the region beyond 1000 sec, we see
that the 89-N estimate in reference 2 should be reduced to about 21.6 N (about 5 lb) for
the tire under the much hotter thermal equilibrium conditions.
Traces 3 and 4 of figure 3 were recorded after the tire had been run for a distance
not accurately measured or recorded but thought to be of the order of 1.61 km (1mile).
The time of recording of the traces would therefore very roughly correspond to i = 2
in table 11. We may only speculate that the same component of drag force of 37.9 N to
overcome friction forces (according to eq. (11))would apply after the tire reached
thermal equilibrium. However, it appears that the 1. 5-mm average slide of an element
of rubber surface must be due to the geometry involved in producing a flat area moving
steadily around the periphery of a toroid. We would expect that tremendous internal
stresses would be required in the rubber to change the slide pattern or magnitude sub­
stantially. The same component of road resistance of about 37.9 N should therefore
26



=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
probably be assumed tentatively to exist after thermal equilibrium is reached. Under
that assumption, after establishment of thermal equilibrium, the total drag of the tire
should be approximately the 37. 9 N due to friction involved in slippage plus the estimate
from reference 2 for hysteresis as adjusted to 21.6 N, or a total of about 59. 5 N
(13.4 lb), of which about 64 percent is required to overcome friction between tire and
pavement and about 36 percent to overcome rubber hysteresis.
A certain discrepancy still needs to be considered. By double interpolation in ta­
ble I, at an elapsed time of about 70 sec, the rate of flow of heat through the outer sur­
face of the tread must be about 28 W, or about 1160 W/m 2 . With the contact conductance
4 2
earlier derived, of the order of 3x10 W/(m )(K), which would be even higher between
2
rubber and pavement, the flow of 1160 W/m would require an average temperature dif­
ference during contact with the pavement of only a very small fraction of a degree Kel­
vin. And yet, the trends at 40 and 100 sec in figure 14 suggest that the rubber surface
temperature at about 70 sec should have been perhaps 7 K above the road surface tem­
perature. In figure 13, from the appearance of the curve (straight line) of initial rubber
temperature for trace 3, it is apparent that the temperature of the rubber surface must
have been about 0. 8 K relative to the polyimide (or road surface) temperature when the
two first came into contact. Such a condition would be necessary in order that the com­
puted initial rubber temperature should be independent of assumed contact conductance.
But the tire had been rolling on the road for a time interval of the order of 70 sec.
The discrepancy may possibly be explained by the following considerations:
(1) The distance run before the making of traces 3 and 4 (ref. 2) was not actually
measured. The time could well have been substantially less than the 70 sec estimated.
(2) As the air temperature was about 5 K less than the road temperature, the tem­
perature of the tire at the start of the run could well have been substantially less than
that of the road, so that the temperature reached after about 70 sec might have been
considerably less relative to the road than relative to the initial temperature of the tire.
(3) The temperature of about 302 K (84' F) measured for the tire with a contact
pyrometer had to be taken not only after the making of traces 3 and 4 but also after an
unspecified amount of additional running, which may have heated the tire appreciably
hotter. Because of these possible explanations of the discrepancy, it is not believed
that it should overbalance the weight of this analysis.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF THERMAL ANALYSIS
The thermal analysis has indicated the following:
(1) Contact thermal conductance between tread surface and polyimide surface is
4 2 4
higher than 1.2X104 and may be higher than 5. 7x10 W/(m )(K). A value of 3x10
2
W/(m )(K) seems reasonable for use.
27



=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
(2) The distance slipped between an element of rubber surface and pavement varies
as the square root of the sum of two components, (a) a constant and (b) the product of
another constant by the square of the distance of the element from the tread centerline.
(3) For the size and type of free rolling tire used in the experiments, the average
distance of slip between any element of the tire surface and the road surface due to
squirming within the contact area is about 1. 5 mm. This slip occurs as a complicated
series of stick and slip conditions.
(4) The friction work involved in the slippage due to squirming causes a tire drag of
about 37.9 N (8. 5 lb), or about 64 percent of the total drag of a tire that has reached
thermal equilibrium.
(5) Although the part of the tire drag caused by mechanical hysteresis within the
rubber is predominant when the tire is cold, it gradually decreases by 75 percent or
more as the tire heats, so that for the tire that has reached thermal equilibrium me­
chanical hysteresis accounts for only about 36 percent of the total tire drag.
APPLICATION OF RESULTS TO ALUMINUM SURFACED RUNWAY
- .
In reference 1, a number of concepts were discussed by which aircraft braking
might possibly be improved by providing a highly conductive surface. Great difficulty
has always been encountered in getting good wet friction between a tire and any metal
surface, including aluminum. Yet, as illustrated and discussed in reference 1, very
good friction coefficients can easily be obtained between small pieces of rubber and a
moderately clean aluminum surface, even with a stream of water flowing on it. Water
does not even wet the moderately clean aluminum surface. Before the use of an alumi­
num surface can be seriously considered it seems necessary that some basic research
be done to determine just why the difficulty exists with a tire under load, even at very
low speeds. Finding the reason might result in a solution. That solution might possibly
involve a grooving or perforation pattern of the aluminum surface or some provision for
porous drainage of the surface. In the meantime, pending such basic research, other
concepts could be considered. The concept listed as most probable of success in refer­
ence 1 was attainment of a substantially greater braking force than is now possible, per­
haps as great as 1.4 times the vertical load, with a textured runway surface that ex­
poses tread rubber to small areas of aluminum and small areas of abrasive material.
This concept could not have been quantitatively evaluated because both the rate of gen­
eration of heat by friction and the thermal contact conductance were unknown. To make
possible a quantitative appraisal of that concept was one of the principal incentives for
conduction of the analysis that has been described here.
The possibility now exists for such a quantitative appraisal. However, only a
superficial examination of the problem will be presented here for the purpose of illus­
28



=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
trating the potentiality.
We shall seek an estimate of the maximum temperature reached within the footprint
of a free rolling aircraft tire because of friction due to slippage associated with squirm­
ing. We will then consider whether that temperature is great enough to cause softening
of the rubber surface and consequent degradation of friction coefficient.
6
An aircraft tire will be considered with an inflation pressure of about 1.38~10
2 1
N/m (200 psi) and with a footprint 22 times as long as that of the tire with which the
traces in figures 2 and 3 were obtained. The average footprint length determined from
the four temperature traces for the automotive tire was 0. 177 m. Thus the assumed
footprint length for the aircraft tire will be 0.442 m. The pressure between tread sur­
face and runway will be assumed uniform and equal to the inflation pressure. A landing
speed of 82.3 m/sec (160 knots) will be assumed. Coefficient of friction will be taken
as 1.0, as with the automotive tire. The average distance of slip will be assumed as
1
3. 75 mm, 23 times that found for the automobile tire. Because the dimensions of the
flat spot on the aircraft tire are greater relative to the circumference of the tire, it is
1
believed the 22-fold assumption of average sliding distance is conservative.
As the footprint of the aircraft tire is approximately elliptical, the average time of
contact of an elemental area of rubber surface with the runway is appreciably less than
the centerline length of the footprint. Regardless of the width of the elliptical footprint,
it can easily be shown that the average length on an area basis is 8/3n, or about 0. 85,
times the centerline length. Thus, with a velocity of 82.3 m/sec and with the centerline
length of 0. 442 m, the average time spent within the footprint by an elemental area of
rubber is about 4 . 5 6 ~ 1 0 -s~ec. The average rate of heat generation by friction, then,
must be the product of the normal pressure, the coefficient of friction, and the average
length of slip, divided by the average time of contact, or
6
1.38~10x 1.0 x 3 . 7 5 ~ 1 0 -w~/m 2 = 1. 135x106 W/m2
g(t) = (16)
4. 5 6 ~ 1 0 - ~
For application of equation (1) or (Ai'), with use of the conductivity of asphalt instead of
that of polyimide, we have
krs O. l4
g(t>= 135x106 w/m 2 = 6. 33x105 W/m2 (17)
0.14 + 0.111
krs kas
+
and
29



=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
kas 0.111 X 1. 135X106 w/m2 = 5. 02x105 w/m2
g(t) =
+
0.14 0.111
krs kas
+
Now 6 . 3 3 ~ 1 0W~/m 2 will flow into the rubber with a slower rise of surface temper-
5 2
ature than will exist with 5.02~10 W/m flowing into the asphalt. However, the contact
conductance found in this analysis is so high that no very great temperature difference
should be needed between the two surfaces to keep their temperatures increasing at
about the same rate. So we may get a useful result if we determine the distribution of
the friction heat between the two surfaces that will cause their temperatures to increase
at the same rate. To get the same temperature on both surfaces at the end of any time
interval during contact, we may equate right sides of equation (3) for rubber and asphalt
and solve for qr/qas, getting
where <pr and <pas are fluxes into rubber and asphalt, respectively. Such ratio, with
a total g(t) of 1. 135x10
6
W/m
2,
calls for a flow of heat into the rubber at a rate of
7 . 3 1 ~ 1 0W~/m 2 and into the asphalt at 4 . 0 3 ~ 1 0W~/m2. If we use the equivalent imag­
inary condition represented by equation (1) (see eqs. (17) and (18)), this result means
4 2
that 9 . 8 ~ 1 0 W/m will flow through the contact conductance from asphalt to rubber in
order to keep the surface temperatures equal.
In reference 1, it is shown theoretically that contact thermal conductance between
two materials such as rubber and polyimide may be expressed approximately as
(hi:
h = + h;A1)-l = hpolhrs
hrs hpol
+-
where hi: and h-' are contact resistances within the rubber and polyimide surfaces
PO1
and that
hrs - krs
---
hpol kpol
It is also argued there that, if a different material is substituted, such as asphalt for
polyimide, with similar contact conditions, we may substitute has as defined by the
following equation for h in equation (20):
PO1
30



=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
By solving equations (20) and. (21) for hrs and hpol, then calculating a value of has
with equation (22), and finally substituting the value of has for h in equation (20),
4 2 PO1
with use of a contact conductance of 3x10 W/(m )(K) for the rubber-polyimide interface.
k = 0.156 W/(m)(K), kas = 0. 111W/(m)(K), and krs = 0. 14 W/(m)(K), we derive a
PO1 4 2
contact conductance for the rubber-asphalt interface of 2. 52x10 W/(m )(K). With such
4 2
a contact conductance, the flow of 9.8X10 W/m from asphalt surface to rubber surface
would require a temperature difference of only about 3. 89 K. On later contacts of the
tire with other positions on the asphalt, the temperature of the tire surface would be
initially higher and the mean temperature difference between the surfaces would reduce
or even reverse.
We now see that we will get very nearly the maximum temperature elevation of the
rubber surface if we use equation (3) for computing the temperature of the asphalt sur­
5
face, using the thermal flux of 5.02XlO W/m2 from equation (18) that is generated by
4
friction on the asphalt surface minus the liberal estimate of 9. 8x10 W/m2 flowing from
5 2
asphalt to rubber. Thus we get a net flow of 4. 04x10 W/m into the asphalt. The re­
sult, for the average interval of 4. 5 6 ~ 1 0 -se~c, is an increase of temperature of the
rubber surface by 68. 8 K. If we assume an initial runway temperature of 311 K
(100' F), we will have rubber surface temperatures of about 380 K (224' F).
This temperature might not be sufficient to soften the rubber surface significantly,
and thereby reduce the friction coefficient, but we observe that it exists without applica­
tion of any braking force. Under conditions of braking, it is necessary to increase the
total part of the area within the footprint where forward slip occurs and to reduce the
total part where backward slip occurs. An increase in maximum distance slipped re­
sults.
Also, this calculation was made for average conditions, including average distance
slipped. As we saw earlier, the distance slipped varies greatly with distance from the
tread centerline and the maximum distance slipped is therefore substantially greater
than the average with consequent greater local heating.
We do not have the necessary data to calculate the maximum temperatures that
might be reached, for maximum slip under braking conditions, but it should be sub­
stantially greater than the 380 K calculated previously.
Softening of the rubber because of high local temperatures, even for very short
times, might cause viscous shear of the rubber which would generate heat under the
rubber surface from whence it could not flow rapidly either to the tire surface or deeper
into the tread. Temperatures within the shearing region close to the surface would then
go far higher than the values estimated previously.
3 1



=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
Now if we rearrange equation (3), we have
where p is the density and c the specific heat of the material. We see that, if we
increased the kpc product by even as little as twofold, for example, by adding alumi­
num particles to the aggregate used for the surface layer of the runway, we would re­
duce the average temperature elevation of 68. 8 K to about 48.6 K giving us an average
temperature leaving contact of 359.6 K (about 188' F) instead of 380 K (225' F).
It is appreciated that the results described are a greatly compounded extension from
the raw data seen in figures 2 and 3 and that they could therefore be only approximate.
But even with a wide margin of possible error, they strongly suggest that braking could
probably be improved by even a moderate increase in heat absorbing capacity of the
runway surface.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
.~
The analysis reported herein was conducted with use of minimal experimental data.
For that reason conclusions can be of only an approximate, or tentative, nature. It is
believed the results are contrary to existing suppositions to such an extent that they
should justify further research into the questians of how much heat is generated by fric­
tion between tread and asphalt for a free rolling tire, how such heat generation may be
reduced, and how the generated heat is dissipated.
With due regard to the need for more extensive research, the following tentative
conclusions seem to be justified
1. In the free rolling of a tire on a hard surface, a substantial amount of slipping
or squirming (in a stick-slip manner) occurs between elementary tread surfaces and the
supporting surface (approximately an average of 1. 5 mm in the tests analyzed here).
2. Slippage of elements of rubber surface relative to pavement, for a free rolling
automotive tire, at least approximately conforms to the concept that a longitudinal slip
of constant magnitude occurs for all distances from the tread centerline, simultaneously
with a transverse slip whose magnitude is proportional to the distance from the tread
centerline.
3. Friction between the tread of a free rolling tire and the supporting surface, due
to slippage, comprises a significant fraction of the road resistance.
4. The same type of friction must account for a substantial fraction of tread wear.
32



=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
5. The thermal contact conductance between tire tread and supporting surface is
not low enough to provide a substantial barrier to the transfer of heat.
6. Friction generated by the squirming between a runway surface and the tread of an
aircraft tire that is not really skidding may develop enough heat to limit the braking
force at which skidding begins.
7. Moderate increase of the product of conductivity, density, and specific heat, for
a thin layer on the surface of a runway, would result in substantially lower surface tem­
peratures, thereby permitting increases in maximum available braking force.
Lewis Research Center,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
Cleveland, Ohio, July 28, 1975,
505-0 8.
33



=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
APPENDIX A
FINITE-DIFFERENCE METHOD FOR THERMAL ANALYSIS
-~
A type of Crank-Nicholson scheme (ref. 9) was used for the numerical analysis of
heat flow on the surface of and within both the nickel-grid sensors and the tire tread.
Various entities that will be used in description of the analytical method are identified
in figure 4.
Equation (1.9) in reference 9 for one-dimensional heat flow reads as follows:
'j, n+l - u J . , n = U J . +I, n - 2uj, n uj-l, n
~ +
A t
(Ax)2
where u. is temperature of midpoint of layer j at time n, A t is interval between
J, n
time n and. time n + 1, cy is thermal diffusivity, and Ax is thickness of a layer.
Equation (1.21) of the same reference, with similar notations, reads as follows:
U j, n+l - uj, n = cy U j+l, n+l - 2uj, n+l uj-l, n+l
+
At
The first step in developing the basic finite-d.ifference equation for use in the pres­
ent analysis was to write an equation with the left side the same as that of cquation (Al)
or (A2),but with the right side a simple arithmetical average of the right sides of equa­
tions (Al) and (A2),giving,
U j, n+l - uj, n = U ] . +I,n + U j +l, n+l - 2u j, n - 2u j, n+l-+ 'j-1, n -uj-1, n+l
+ 643)
At 2
Equation (A3) in that form is suitable for application to a semi-infinite plate of one
uniform material, d.ivided into layers of uniform thickness. It was desired here, par­
ticularly for application to the nickel-grid sensor, to be able to apply the equation to
layers of differing thickness and/or material. Accordingly, equation (A3) was revised
to read,
34



=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
where c is the specific heat of the material in layer j, p is the density of the material
in layer j, (Ax). is the thickness of layer j, and where
J
In equation (A5), k. is the thermal conductivity of the material in layer j, and h
J j, j+l
is the contact conductance of the interface between layers j and j + 1 (always to be
taken as infinite when the layers j and j + 1 are contiguous parts of a single solid
material).
When all values ul, n7 U 2,n7 u3, n, . . . , have been determined, the only unknowns
in equation (A4) are u. and u. Hence, simu Itaneous equations
j, n+l’ ‘j+l, n+l’ J -1,n+l’
for ul,n? U 2,n’ U 3,n’ . , up to the greatest value of j that is significant, form an
easily solved tridiagona * l m * atrix for the temperatures ul, n+17 u2, n+l, u3, n+l, . . . .
In application of equation (A4) to the nickel-grid sensor, a tentative history of
thermal flux through the upper surface was always used. That flux, for the interval
from time n to time n + 1, was substituted for the second term in the right side of
equation (A4) for j = 1. The maximum value of j, jmax, was made as great as neces­
sary in order that ujlnax, for any n would not be significantly greater or less than
the initial value ujmax, o. Then the first term on the right side of equation (A4) was
omitted for j = jmax. Finally, after solution of the system of equations, the surface
temperature of the sensor was determined as
where cp is the average thermal flux through the upper surface of the polyimide
Pb, n+l)
for the interval from time n to time n + 1.
In application of equation (A4) to the tire tread, given an assumed contact conduct­
ance between rubber and polyimide and given a history of temperatures on and thermal
fluxes through the polyimide surface, a slight complication was of course involved for
the first layer. Here, the thermal flux through the outer tread surface during the in­
35



=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
terval from time point n to time point n + 1 is composed of two parts, according to
equation (1). One of those parts cpC(,, n+l) is conductive flux through the contact con­
ductance from the polyimide surface; the other cprf(n, n+l) is friction heat generated on
the rubber surface. Neither cpC(,, n+l) nor Vrf(n, n+l) is known. However, we may
use results from the thermal analysis for the nickel-grid sensor, namely, cpp(n, n+l) and
the average temperature of the polyimide surface during the interval from time point n
to time point n + 1, u ~ ~n+(l). ~ ,
Implicit in equation (1) is the following equation:
A finite -differ ence analogue of that equation is
where qf(n,n+l) is the average rate of heat generation by friction on both sides of the
interface between polyimide and rubber during the interval from time point n to time
point n + 1, and UOr(n,n+l) and u are the average temperatures on rubber
Op(n, n+l)
surface and polyimide surface respectively during the same interval. The only unknowns
in equation (A8) are qf(n,n+l) and u ~ ~n+(l). ~ W,e may eliminate g(t) from equations
(1) and (A7), giving
A finite-difference analogue of equation (A9) is
is average rate of flow of heat into rubber surface during the interval
where qr(n, n+l)
from time point n to time point n + 1. Now, for j = 1, we may substitute the positive
left side of equation (A10) for the negative second term in the right side of equation (A4),
giving
36
I



=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
Equation (All) has three unknowns, namely, u ~ ~n+(l),~ ul,, n+l, and u2, n+l. This
equation, then, is suitable for the second row in our tridiagonal matrix. But we need
an equation for the first row of the matrix containing only u ~ ~n+(l) ~and, u l,n+l as
unknowns. Such an equation may be easily obtained by substituting
1 2kr
for its approximate equivalent qr(n,n+l) in
[UOr(n,n+l) - ( ~ 1n, ~ 1n +, l j
+
equation (AlO), giving
(Here we use kr instead of krs because krs applies only as far down as the depth of
surface asperities. The depth to which kr applies in eq. (A12) amounts to one half the
thickness of the uppermost layer of rubber. ) So equation (A12) for the first row, equa­
tion (All) for the second row, and equation (A4) for subsequent rows, make up a tri­
diagonal matrix that can readily be solved for u. for j 2 1 and for u ~ ~ ( ~ , ~ + ~ ) .
J, n+l
Equation (A10) may then be solved for qr(n,n+l). Finally, equation (1) may be solved
for g(t).
37



=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
APPENDIX B
RECONCILIATION OF RECENT RESEARCH AT UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
WITH THIS REPORT
Reference 3 came to the author's attention after this report was written and after
his retirement, but before publication of this report. Rather than undertake substantial
revision of the body of this report to include analysis and discussion of reference 3
wherever pertinent, it was decided to restrict such analysis and discussion to this ap­
pendix. Such analysis and discussion will begin with the question of depth at which heat
is generated by friction.
NATURE OF GENERATION OF HEAT BY FRICTION
A part of reference 3 that is vital to the present report is Section VI, entitled
GENERATION OF HEAT DUE TO SURFACE EFFECTS. This section of reference 3
is directed toward a theoretical estimation of the effective depth beneath a rubbing sur­
face at which friction heat is generated and toward the question of the fraction of the
total friction heat generated within each of two different materials when their surfaces
are rubbed together.
Equation (1)was derived in reference 1under the theory that the heat of friction is
generated within the surface layers of atoms or, at most, just a few atomic layers
beneath each surface. If, instead, the friction heat were generated at a substantial
depth beneath either surface, then equation (1)would not be valid and the entire analysis
reported here would have to be carefully re-examined as to whether its results are
significant.
Theories about the cause of friction and the manner of generation of heat by fric­
tion are still controversial. Probably the oldest theory that still has its adherents is
that of Coulomb. According to Coulomb's theory, mutual adhesion of the rubbing sur­
faces plays only a minor role, if any, in friction. Instead, this theory holds that fric­
tional force is caused by the action of myriads of asperities on the two surfaces climb­
ing up on each other like pairs of mating wedges. Such wedging action would require an
equilibrium between force vectors normal to the gross surfaces and force vectors tan­
gential to those surfaces. According to this theory, the net effect of these many minute
tangential vectors constitute the frictional force.
According to this theory, generation of heat would be due to hysteresis involved in
the repeated deformation and relaxation of material at substantial depths beneath the
38



=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
surface, caused by the localized wedging action. The derivation of equation (1)
(eq. (B12) in ref. 1)would not be valid.
According to more modern theory, asperities have little effect except to account for
the fact that the effective rubbing area varies as the normal load between two metals,
or as a power of the normal load somewhat less than unity when a polymer is involved.
According to this theory, as clearly explained recently by Merchant (ref. lo), the fric­
tional force is caused mainly by adhesion between surface atoms of the two rubbing ma­
terials, though some frictional force may be caused by asperities on the harder surface
"plowing" through the softer surface. The atomic adhesion does not require the pres­
ence of asperities, except that the individual adhering atoms themselves might be re­
garded as asperities.
Defense of the Coulomb theory was presented by Bikerman in his discussion of
Merchant's report (ref. 10). In that discussion Bikerman freely acknowledged that the
adhesion theory represents the majority view, as did Ku in his later nonpartison dis­
cussion.
The present author can add little indeed to the discussions among Merchant, Biker-
man, Ku, Tabor, and others when he states that he himself adheres to the adhesion
theory and consequently believes that his equation (eq. (1))is approximately correct.
Clark and Staples in reference 3 report about the same coefficient of friction (1.4)
for a rubber tire on a smooth dry aluminum surface as on a dry concrete or asphalt
surface. Such a comparison seems to suggest little effect indeed from "plowing" of
asperities through the rubber. If the "plowing" contribution to friction were substan­
tial, we should expect a much greater coefficient with concrete or asphalt than with
smooth aluminum.
In figure 16 a single asperity on a hard supporting surface is shown for simplicity
as a right prism of isosceles triangular cross section whose axis is perpendicular to
the plane of the figure and extends at right angles to the direction of slide of the rubber
surface above it. Adhesion between rubber and solid material is assumed nonexistant,
so that the only forces exerted by the prismatic asperity on the rubber are
Pnl and
Pn2, each normal to a surface of the prism. These two forces are resolved into com­
ponents P1 and F1 on the uphill side of the prism and components P2 and F2 on
the downhill side of the prism.
Because of the hysteresis loss factor 17 used by Clark and Staples, we may write



=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
The net frictional force exerted by the asperity against the motion of the rubber will be
F = F 1 - F2
and the total upward reaction of the asperity against the load will be
P = P1 + P2
The tangent of each of the angles p shown in figure 16 will be
p1 p2
The coefficient of friction must be
F
p = -
P
Solving equations (Bl) to (B5), we get
tanp=-p 036)
17
Note that the value of p given by equation (B6) must exist for the average asperity
if the sliding friction coefficient p is to exist. If we use the coefficient 1.4 found by
Clark and Staples and a value 17 = 1/2 which is probably unreasonably large, we get
about 76. 5' for the value of p. Even with 17 = 0. 9, /3 = 59.7'. Williamson (ref. 11)
found that typical asperities on surfaces of solids have slopes occasionally as steep as
25' but that the slopes are usually between 5' and 10'.
It appears, therefore, that the Coulomb concept of friction is quite untenable for the
rubber tire sliding on a smooth aluminum surface.
The analysis by Clark and Staples on generation of heat by friction may have an ap­
proximate application to the adhesion concept of friction. In considering such applica­
tion we will, for the present, ignore the effect on heat generation due to the rupture of
rubber-to-rubber bonds. As many rubber -to-aluminum bonds would be created exo­
thermically as would be ruptured endothermically. The ruptures of rubber -to-rubber
bonds would be extremely close to the rubber-aluminum interface. If, on the average,
such ruptures occurred at depths of more than a few atomic diameters beneath the tread
surfaces, treads would not last as long as they do. Moreover; rupture of rubber-to­
40



=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
rubber bonds must be endothermic.
The treatment by Clark and Staples ignores forces normal to the rubbing surfaces
and apparently does not need to take those forces into account for its purposes. Mathe­
matical expressions are developed for stresses and strains within a semi-infinite solid
whose surface is infinitely smooth. The stresses and strains are treated as being
caused by intermittent (stick-slip) movement of a minute asperity of the other body
along the infinitely smooth surface. That is, a model is used according to which a
frictional force is intermittently applied, tangentially to the infinitely smooth surface,
along a line that lies in the surface at right angles to the direction of the force.
Such a model corresponds with the atomic interactions presumed to generate fric­
tional heat by Tabor in one of his responses to Bikerman in the discussion of Merchant's
report (ref. 10). It is true that an atom displaced by adhesion does not correspond to
the line application of a force assumed by Clark and Staples, but a line of adhering
atoms within the surface could be considered without undue violence to the adhesion con­
cept of friction.
According to this model, Clark and Staples developed the following equation for dif­
ferential heat generation for a single cycle of application of the force:
2
dx
d Q = a .
4i7E x
where P is the tangential force, E is modulus of elasticity, and x is distance be­
neath the surface.
The d.efinite integral of equation (B7), for total heat generation occurring at all
depths between x1 and x2 is
2 ($)
a x 1 < x < x2) = 9In
4i7E
< <
This equation has the obvious faults that a x 1 x x2) approaches infinity as x2
approaches infinity or as x1 approaches zero. Hence, the range of values of x
throughout which the equation may be applied is subject to judgment and the practical
value of the equation is consequently somewhat limited.
A related limitation of the usefulness of equation (B8) as applied to a stick-slip
phenomenon is due to the fact that its derivation involved the implicit assumption that
the force P is applied long enough that a steady-state distribution of strains and
stresses is achieved. For such a steady-state distribution at an infinite depth x2 the
force P would have to be applied for infinite time. Clearly, equation (B8) could not be
used with a greater value of x2 than the depth to which a transverse wave could travel
during one cycle of application of the force P.
41



=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
The adhesion of atoms at the surfaces of contact for extremely short intervals of
time could cause an approximation of the steady-state distribution of stresses and
strains only at very shallow depths. An exact solution of the problem dynamically
would require a major mathematical effort, which cannot be undertaken here. The so­
lution would have to involve treatment of an infinite series of transverse waves traveling
from the surface into the depths of the rubber, with due regard to the attenuation of
each wave at every depth because of mechanical hysteresis. However, a useful approx­
imate solution seems to be possible with use of equation (B8)if we use for x2 the depth
to which a transverse wave could travel during one cycle of application of force. Ne­
glect of heat generated at depths greater than x2 because of the eventual travel of
transverse waves to greater depths should not be too serious because of the very large
value of q for tread rubber. Also, such neglect would be countered by the fact that
stresses and strains resulting from transient surface forces would tend to be concen­
trated at positions nearer the surface than called for by equation (B7).
We may gain some conception of the ease or difficulty involved in the flow of heat to
the rubbing surface, from the depths at which it is generated according to equation (B7),
by considering two imaginary conditions as follows: (1)the heat is generated according
to equation (B7),but is all compelled to flow to the surface because of a plane parallel
to the rubbing surface and having zero conductance, at the depth x2; and (2) the same
quantity of heat is generated at an effective depth xe, and it is all compelled to flow to
the surface by a plane parallel to the rubbing surface and having zero conductance, at a
depth infinitesimally deeper than xe. For the purpose of the comparison, we will as­
sume that the temperature reached at depth xe for condition (2) is equal to the average
temperature reached within the region between x1 and x2 for condition (1).
For the imaginary condition (l),if we assume that enough cycles of heating accord­
ing to equation (B8)have occurred for a virtual steady-state temperature distribution
to exist, then
where u is the temperature at distance x below the surface and f is the frequency of
the stick-slip cycle. From equation (B9),
47rE
We may now obtain an average temperature for imaginary condition (1) as
42



=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
-
T =
a
with use of equation (B10) for u and equation (B7)for dQ. Thus,
2(x2 - XI)
f:)
But the temperature reached at depth xe under imaginary condition (2) must be
Substituting from equation (B8) into equation (B13), then equating Ta and Tb, and
solving equations (B12) and (B13), we get
As we must not make x1 equal to zero, probably a minimum reasonable value for
it would be about half the diameter of a carbon atom or about 9X10-8 mm.
For use in estimating a reasonable value for x2, we will assume that, whenever a
rupture of either a rubber-to-aluminum bond or a rubber-to-rubber bond occurs, the
rubber atom will not have been displaced by more than about 10 diameters of a carbon
atom, or about 1. 8X10-6 mm. We will assume that the rubber is sliding relative to the
aluminum at 30 m/sec (98.4 ft/sec).
We may compute the speed of a transverse (or a solenoidal) wave through the tread
rubber with the following equation from reference 12:
=Q
v
6
where G is shearing modulus of elasticity, or rigidity. With a value range of 1 . 3 ~ 1 0
6 2
to 2.0XlO N/m for G (values for polyisoprene vulcanized with 33 percent carbon black
43



=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
3
from ref. 13) and with p = 1200 kg/m (ref. 14), equation (B15) yields a value range
for v of 32.9 to 40. 8 m/sec. We will use the approximate median of this range,
37 m/sec.
The time for travel through 10 diameters of a carbon atom at 30 m/sec (98.4 ft/sec)
would be 6x10-l1 sec. During that time, the transverse wave at 37 m/sec would travel
approximately 2. 2X10-6 mm. Thus, 2. 2X1Ow6mm seems to be a reasonable value
for x2.
-8
With the values x1 = 9x10 mm and x2 = 2. 2X10-6 mm, equation (B14) gives us
an effective depth of heat generation of xe = 2. 66X10-7 mm. This result puts xe
within less than two diameters of a carbon atom from the rubbing surface. The resist­
ance to the flow of the heat through two layers of atoms or less should be quite negli­
gible.
Clark and Staples conclude from equation (B8) and experiment that much more heat
would be generated in rubber than in aluminum when one slides over the other. This
author would not for a moment quarrel with that conclusion. In the discussion following
equation (1)he stated that it represents an imaginary equivalent condition in which heat
~~
generation occurs on the surfaces in proportion to their conductivities. No such real
condition was assumed or concluded to exist in the derivation of the equation in refer­
ence 1. Instead, under the assumption that the heat was generated practically within
the surface layers of atoms, it was considered that it could flow from the surface of one
asperity to the surface of another asperity (in the other material) with only negligible
contact resistance. The result is the same as if the heat had been generated at the roots
of the asperities in proportion to the conductivities.
Gross stick-slip conditions unquestionably exist. Such conditions arc necessary,
for example, to explain the jagged curves for rate of heat generation in figures 9 to 12.
Stick-slip is thought to be due to the fact that static friction is usually greater than slid­
ing friction. The stick-slip condition is usually associated with a vibratory system that
involves oscillation of all or part of the rubbing surface fore and aft in the direction of
sliding. The vibration may be far from sinusoidal. Whatever the velocity of the slide,
a vibrational amplitude might exist at which the maximum backward velocity of the sur­
face due to the vibration is equal to the forward velocity of the slide. Static friction then
exists momentarily once during each cycle of oscillation and causes energy to be fed
into the vibratory system. The stick-slip condition terminates when the sliding velocity
requires an excessive oscillatory amplitude, which ruptures part of the vibrating sys­
tem, makes it very nonlinear, or causes it to dissipate energy more rapidly than the
static friction can feed energy into it.
The stick-slip condition shown by the curves for rate of heat generation in figures
9 to 12 must surely have caused some heat generation deep within the rubber. That
heat, however, would not have had time to flow appreciably through the rubber to the
temperature sensors. Consequently, it could not have formed an appreciable part of
44



=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
the 64 percent of total heat estimated to be caused by the type of slippage known as
squirming. It seems, therefore, that little leeway exists for the supposition of a sub­
stantial amount of heat generation by the gross stick-slip condition. Only 36 percent of
the total drag of the tire was ascribed to the effect of hysteresis. The minute distortions
of the rubber caused by sticking of elements of its surface several times during a total
movement of only 1. 5 mm could scarcely compare with the gross cyclic distortions of
the rubber caused by the large flat spot in contact with the supporting surface. Hence
the heat generation within the rubber due to the stick-slip action could be only a small
part of the 36 percent.
From the foregoing analysis and discussion, it appears that the treatment of this
subject by Clark and Staples, in conjunction with the analysis presented here, has helped
considerably to demonstrate that heat of friction is generated mainly within the surface
atoms of rubber and that it should be possible to dissipate it rapidly from that surface
according to equation (1) with use of a supporting material of high thermal conductivity.
(I am informed that the first author of ref. 3 does not agree with this statement. I do not
know whether the second author is yet aware of the statement. ) Additional evidence from
their report as to the efficacy of an aluminum surface for that purpose will now be dis­
cussed.
DISSIPATION OF FRICTIONAL HEAT FROM RUBBER TO HIGHLY
CONDUCTIVE MATING SURFACE
Clark and Staples in reference 3 report a summary of tests involving the sliding of
a tire with locked wheel on a strip of aluminum sheet approximately 6. 1 m (20 ft) long
2
and 0.48 mm (0.019 in. ) thick. They report the area of the contact patch as 380.6 cm
(59 in. 2, and the length as 30 cm (11. 8 in.). The width of the contact patch, then,
should have been 12. 7 cm (5 in. ). They report that a temperature rise of 44.4 K (80' F)
was measured on the surface of the contact patch at the end of the slide, with a load of
4450 N (1000 lb) and velocity of 0.643 m/sec (2. 11 ft/sec).
It is known (ref. 7) that substantially uniform temperature will be reached through­
out the depth of a layer of metal, with a constant heat flux through the surface, if
& > 1
z2
where 1 is thickness. For aluminum, with diffusivity of 8. 5 8 ~ 1 m02~/se~c, contact
duration of 0.466 sec, and 2 = 0.48 mm, this criterion was far exceeded in the tests
reported by Clark and Staples with at/Z2 = 174.
45



=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
With the normal load of 4450 N and coefficient of friction of 1.4, the work done
against friction Wf for each meter of slide was 6230 J. The mass of aluminum heated
during 1meter of slide must have been the product of that meter by the width w of the
contact patch, the thickness 2 of the aluminum sheet, and the density of the aluminum
The temperature elevation then, under the optimistic assumption that all the heat
pal.
generated by friction went into the aluminum, would have been
wf
AT =
3,
With the specific heat cal = 865 J/(kg)(K) and pal = 2700 kg/m equation (B17) gives
a temperature rise of 43.8 K.
This result agrees remarkably well with the temperature rise of about 44.4 K on
the tread surface reported by Clark and Staples. Under the assumption that virtually
all the heat flows into the aluminum, with very high contact conductance, the maximum
temperature of the rubber surface (at the trailing end of the contact patch) immediately
after the slide should be only slightly higher than the temperature reached by the alum­
inum. The fact that the maximum temperature reached by the rubber surface was just
0.6 K higher than the calculated temperature that should have been reached by the
aluminum is another verification of the theory that the heat of friction is generated al­
most wholly on the surface of the rubber and can flow almost entirely into a highly con­
ductive supporting surface. This result also indicates that thermal contact resistance
between tread rubber and aluminum is not great enough to be a substantial impediment
to the dissipation of most of the friction heat into the aluminum. The result also sup­
ports the earlier assumption that the endothermic rupture of rubber-to-rubber bonds
does not account for a substantial fraction of the energy consumed.
Note that the temperature rise of the rubber surface is theoretically not affected by
the velocity of the slide so long as the criterion (B16) is satisfied. With thicker alum­
inum surfaces, however, substantial heat could be conducted away from the rubber even
if this criterion were far from satisfied.
Also note, in view of the close agreement of the tire surface temperature rise re­
ported by Clark and Staples with the calculated temperature rise for the aluminum from
equation (B17), that the tire could have been slid much farther without subshntially
greater rise of its surface temperature.
THERMAL CONTACT CONDUCTANCE
Clark and Staples in reference 3 estimated a value of thermal contact resistance.
They designated their result as R* and called it a "heat flux impedance coefficient",
46



=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
emphasizing that "it is a measure of contact resistance but it is not the contact resist­
'(
ance.
They heated a part of the tread surface of a stationary tire greater than the antici­
pated contact area with heat lamps. They then repeatedly rolled the heated portion of
the tread over temperature sensors, making records of the resulting temperature his­
tories of the sensors. From the rates of temperature rise of the sensors during the
early part of the contact, with use of independent calibrations of the sensors, they de­
duced values o� %.
Their results for R, for two independent sensors were equivalent to conductances
of 1.&lo4 and 2 . 4 ~ 1 0W~/(m2)(K) or 2. 4x103 and 4. 2X103 Btu/(ft2)(hr)(OF). It was
tempting for this author simply to point out that these values are within the range of pos­
sible contact conductances that he found from his study of figure 13. But after careful
study of the sensor design, the method of test, and the results reported in reference 3,
he regretfully concluded that this method cannot indicate the contact conductance with
sufficient accuracy to be of much value.
The sensors used by Clark and Staples were aluminum disks to the under sides of
which had been cemented resistance thermometers just like that illustrated in figure 1.
Each disk was isolated from contact with anything but the tread surface, with the excep­
tion of a hollow plastic cylindrical pedestal, which supported the periphery of the alum­
inum disk from underneath.
This author subjected the system (tread rubber-aluminum disk-resistance thermom­
eter) to runs of the same type of finite-difference computer program that has been de­
scribed. He used a series of assumed values of contact conductance between tread rub­
ber and aluminum disk. He assumed the aluminum disk and the resistance thermometer
to be at a uniform temperature before contact, and assumed the tread rubber to be at a
uniform temperature 40 K ('72' F) higher. The computer program yielded rates of tem­
perature rise during the first 50 to 100 msec for the nickel grid within the resistance
thermometer.
For an assumed infinite contact conductance, the result was 71. 1 K/sec (128' F/
sec). For the same initial temperature difference of 40 K (72' F), Clark and Staples
"sensor 2" showed a rate of temperature rise of 67.3 K/sec (121' F/sec). Thus, ac­
cording to the finite-difference program, their sensor 2 showed an almost infinite con­
2
tact conductance. For an assumed contact conductance of 3500 W/(m )(K), the computer
program showed a temperature rise of 40 K/sec (72' F/sec). Clark and Staples "sen­
sor 1" showed a rate of 39.9 K/sec (71. '8 F/sec). Hence, according to the finite-
difference program, their sensor 1 indicated a contact conductance of only 3500 W/
(m2)(K).
The rates of temperature rise from the computer program should both be expected
to be too high, because of it was necessary to ignore heat that would flow from the alum­
inum disk to the supporting plastic pedestal. That is, if the computer program could
47



=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
have yielded the correct rates of temperature rise for the assumed values of contact
conductance, then somewhat higher contact conductances would have had to be assumed
to match the rates found by Clark and Staples. It is believed this effect would be very
small.
In the treatment of the results by Clark and Staples, it apparently was necessary
for them to regard the thermal contact resistance as being the only impediment to heat
flow for a period of 50 to 100 msec. Actually, in far less than 50 msec, substantial
temperature gradients develop within the rubber, the aluminum disk, and the resistance
thermometer. Because of these gradients, the actual temperature difference available
to drive heat through the contact resistance between rubber and aluminum drops to a
low value in much less than 50 msec and the heat flux becomes largely a function of the
gradients rather than a function of contact resistance. This fact is clearly demonstrated
by the computer result indicating a temperature rise rate for the nickel grid of only
71. 1K/sec (128' F/sec) even with infinite contact conductance.
The enormous difference between the conductances found from the two sensors with
use of the finite difference program precludes the placing of much value on the results.
This author is at a loss to explain the difference, except possibly with the suggestion
either that sensor 1 did not have a good thermally conductive bond between the aluminum
disk and the resistance thermometer, or that sensor 1had a much thicker layer of ce­
ment between the disk and the thermometer than did sensor 2. (The conductance of the
bond between the aluminum disk and the resistance thermometer used in the computer
2
program was 4800 W/(m )(K), the same as earlier found for each of the bonds between
polyimide and nickel grid. ) Note that no such possible failure to achieve a good ther­
mally conductive bond between sensors and asphalt for the tests reported in reference 2
could have affected the analysis of those test results that has been reported here. Even
with the assumption of infinite contact conductance between the resistance thermometers
and the asphalt, the finite-difference program showed only negligible heat entering the
asphalt from the polyimide of the resistance thermometer.
48



=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
REFERENCES
1. Miller, C. David; and Pinkel, I. Irving: Aluminum Runway Surface as Possible
Aid to Aircraft Braking. NASA TN D-7186, 1973.
2. Nybakken, G. H.; Collart, D. Y.; Staples, R. J.; Lackey, J. I.; Clark, S. K.;
and Dodge, R. N. : Preliminary Measurements on Heat Balance in Pneumatic
Tires. (DRDA 036390-2-T, University of Michigan; NGR 23-005-417. ), NASA
CR-121349, 1971.
3. Clark, S. K. ; and Staples, R. J. : Friction and Temperature Rise in Aircraft Tires.
(DRDA 036390-3-F, University of Michigan; NGR 23-005-417. ), NASA CR-134666,
1974.
4. Abraham, Herbert: Asphalts and Allied Substances. Vol. 4 - Methods of Testing
Industrial Raw Bituminous Materials. 6th ed., D. VanNostrand Co., Inc., 1963.
5. Baumeister, T. ; and Marks, Lionel S.: Mechanical Engineers Handbook, McGraw-
Hill.
6. Perry, John H. ; Perry, Robert H. ; Chilton, Cecil H. ; and Kirkpatrick, Sidney D. :
Chemical Engineers Handbook. 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, 1963.
7. Carslaw, Horatio S. ; and Jaeger, J. C. : Cond.uction of Heat in Solids. 2nd ed.,
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1959.
8. Miller, C. David Distribution of Error in Least-Squares Solution of an Overdeter­
mined System of Linear Simultaneous Equations. NASA TN D-6744, 1972.
9. Richtmyer, Robert D. ; and Morton, K. W.: Difference Methods for Initial Value
Problems. 2nd ed. , Interscience Publishers, 1967.
10. Merchant, M. E. : Friction and Adhesion. Interdisciplinary Approach to Friction
and Wear, P. M. Ku, ed., NASASP-181, 1968, pp. 181-266.
11. Williamson, J. B. P. : Topography of Solid Surfaces. Interdisciplinary Approach to
Friction and Wear, P. M. Ku, ed., NASA SP-181, 1968, pp. 85-142.
12. Page, Leigh: Introduction to Theoretical Physics. D. VanNostrand Zompany, Inc.,
1935.
13. Brandrup, J. ; and Immergut, E. H., eds. : Polymer Handbook, Interscience, 1966.
14. Goldsmith, Alexander; Waterman, Thomas E. ; and Hirschhorn, Harry J. : Hand­
book of Thermophysical Properties of Solid Materials. Vol. 4, Pergamon Press,
1961.
49



=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
TABLE I. - TOTAL RATE OF HEAT FLOW THROUGH
BOTH INNER AND OUTER SURFACES OF TIRE
TREAD AT VARIOUS ELAPSED TIMES
AFTER START OF TEST
-
i Elapsed m Rate of flow of heat
2j'
time, K/m out of tread,
sec H .
'
OJ
W
-
~
--- ---
0 0 0.0 (assumed)
1 40 445 130 45.16
70 28.0(by double interpolation)
2 100 667 348 80.4
3 180 778 1000 143.0
4 240 778 1610 193.6
5 480 1220 1350 206.2
6 720 1000 1850 330.6
7 960 1160 2000 255.4
3 1200 778 2580 274.0
3 - 1440 1390 2580 $21.2
-~
~~
TABLE rr. - WHEEL DRAG FORCES NECESSARY TO PROVIDE ENERGY DISSIPATED
BY TREAD HYSTERESIS AT VARIOUS TIMES AFTER START OF TEST
AT 22.4METERS PER SECOND
-
.­
i Elapsed Rate of flow Median of Average Length oj iate of tread Hysteretic
time, of heat out time inter- tempera- time in- hysteretic drag of tread
-
sec of tread, val i (from ture rise, terval i, ieat genera- ~
N Ib
'oi, start of test), ATi, sec tion,
W sec K
Hhi7
W
- -
~~
1 40 22.6 20 4.0 40 1680 75.16 16.90
2 100 62.8 70 4.5 60 1306 58.43 13.13
3 180 112.0 140 5.4 80 1231 55.08 12.38
4 240 168 210 4.4 60 1384 61.92 13.92
5 480 200 360 7.8 240 739 33.06 7.44
6 720 218 600 4.8 240 550 24.61 5.53
7 960 243 840 2.5 240 416 18.61 4.18
8 1200 265 1080 1.4 240 362 16.20 3.64
9 1440 298 1320 1.6 240 409 18.30 4.11
-
-~
50



=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Nickel r 0.005 0.0127
\ (0.0002) (0.0005)
\
\
I 1 0.0254
(0.00 10)
Figure 1. - Detail of sensor construction, (All dimensions in mm (in.).)
r
I,0.020 sec
-
Figure 2. Temperature-time records shown by two nickel-grid sensors when traversed
by tire that hsd been in contact with pavemest for 30 meters or less (ref. 2).
51



=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
-16 K
-
Figure 3. Temperature-time records shown by two nickel-grid sensors when traversed
by tire that had been rolling under load for 2 to 3 kilometers (ref. 2).
)
L-RUbber
II
11
AAXXjjtt11 __--//------LLaayyeerr jj..11 iinn rruubbbbeerr
- Axj =-uj, here
((------LLaayyeerr jj iinn rruubbbbeerr
1 __---
T I - _!--Heat flow into rubber pr(n, tl)
-_*­
. \
-- I '. L' Polyimide friction heat generated here pp(n,
Polyimide/ 1,ntl here' + '.
-. j-1, j
-Layer j in sensor
..--u. here
,-Polyimide I. n ~ '-Layer j+l in sensor
_- /
Asp ha1t
I
/
\
Figure 4. - Generation of heat within interface between surface of rubber tire and surface of temperature sensor, flow of heat, and entities used in
numerical analysis.
52



=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
/’Estimated start
7
of contact
,-Estimated start . _ - --Estimated end of contact
1E * of contact
;3;;8­ 1- ,-Estimated end of contact
- Tempe rat ure of uppe rmost
n sensor surface relative to
Temperature of uppermost 1 its initial temperature
sensor surface relative to
its initial temperature
I
I
3
Thermal flux through
uppermost surface into sensor
Thermal flux through
c
-1
of nickel 0 Temperatures of nickel
grid calculated by
grid calculated by
finite-difference
-2 fini te-diffe rence
computer program
-3 .ICI l - comouter orwram II I - Temperature record
m ,, EE == -- . . 1 . TTee ff mm rroo pp mm eerr aa nn tt ii uu cc rr kk ee ee ll rr ee gg cc rrii oo dd rrdd
33 00
..--..
EE
EE--.. 11
EE--..22
00 22 44 66 88 1100 1122 1144 1166 1188 2200 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time, msec Time, msec
Figure 5. -Temperatures of upper surface and thermal fluxes into upper surface Figure 6. -Temperatures of upper surface and thermal fluxes into upper surface
of nickel-grid sensor derived from temperature record of nickel grid for trace 1, of nickel-grid sensor derived from temperature record of nickel grid for trace 2,
in figure 2. in figure 2.



=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
3i -
1
,estimated start of contact
I ---Estimated end of contact
I,,-
- z
5x104 .E Temperature of uppermost
Estimated start
5 2 sensor surface relative to
'E of contact ,.-Estimated end of contact - 4- 8% its initial temperature
3­
Temperature of uppermost
sensor surface relative to N 2­
its initial temperature -E.-.
3 1- Thermal flux through
uppermost surface into sensor
Thermal flux through c L 0 Y W ' I 0- 7
uppermost surface into sensor m
.
c0
c-
-1­
-x3
-2-
L- \
\ E
-3- E
c+- &'
- o Temoeratures of nickel
o TemDeratures of nickel -4- 3 E
giid calculated by .u 3 giid calculated by
=l
finite-difference -5- w w finite-difference
.>- a
computer program 5 : computer program
Temperature record -6- 8- Temperature record
I from nickel grid J I
I I I -7 - from nickel grid
10 12 14 16 18 20 0-2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time, msec Time, msec
Figure 7. -Temperatures of upper surface and thermal fluxes into upper surface Figure 8. -Temperatures of upper surface and thermal fluxes into upper surface
of nickel-grid sensor derived from temperature record of nickel grid for trace 3, of nickel-grid sensor derived from temperature record of nickel grid for trace 4,
in figure 3. in figure 3.



=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
Temperature of rubber surface relative
to initial temperature of polyimide
surface (rubber surface temperature)
Temperature of rubber surface relative
to that of polyimide surface (relative
rubber surface temperature)
Conductive heat flux from polyimide
-4 surface to rubber surface (conductive flux)
-5
3xld
" mu
+. L .. Rates of generation of heat by friction
3CA on rubber surface, on polyimide surface,
n Ia, and total (rubber friction heat, polyimide
a 3I friction heat, and total friction heat)
c 0 -:t
0
f
-1O[
I
-31
0
Figure 9. -Temperatures of rubber surface, conductive heat fluxes across polyimide-rubber interface, and
rates of generation of heat by friction for trace 1, with assumed contact conductance of 11315 Wl(m2KK)
or 2000 Btul (ft2MhrH'FI.
55



=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
Temperature of rubber surface relative
to initial temperature of polyimide
surface (rubber surface temperature)
Temperature of rubber surface relative
-2
to that of polyimide surface (relative
rubber surface temperature)
c Conductive heat flux from polyimide
surface to rubber surface (conductive flux)
i
7x104
Rates of generation of heat by friction
on rubber surface, on polyimide surface,
and total (rubber friction heat, polyimide
e
friction heat, and total friction heat)
1
0
-1
I I I I I
-31
0 2 4 6 8 10
Time, msec
Figure 10. -Temperatures of rubber surface, conductive heat fluxes across polyimide-rubber interface, and
rates of generation of heat by friction for trace 1, with assumed contact conductance of 56 744 WI (m%K)
or 10 OOO Btul (ft2)(hr)('F).
56



=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
o r
Y
Temperature of rubber surface relative
to initial temperature of polyimide
surface (rubber surface temperature)
Temperature of rubber surface relative
to that of polyimide surface (relative
rubber surface temperature)
Conductive heat flux from polyimide
surface to rubber surface (conductive flux)
P
14xJ
N- -
E 12
3
-
.c0- 10
.cU_
L 8­
L
x
fl
6­ Rates of generation of heat by friction
on rubber surface, on polyimide surface,
4­ and total (rubber friction heat, polyimide
friction heat, and total friction heat)
2­
c 0 0-
mW
c ­
Em -2
-4 -
I
-6 I -I._L.L-.!
0 2 4 6 8 1 0
Time, msec
Figure 11. - Temperatures of rubber surface, conductive heat fluxes across polyimide-rubber interface, and
rates of generation of heat by friction for trace 2, with assumed contact conductance of 11345 WI(m2KK)
or 2M)O Btu, (ft21(hrlf°FI.
57



=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
Y 2 r
c
0 w­
2 % 0 Temperature of rubber surface relative
to initial temperature of polyimide
surface (rubber surface temperature)
L
Temperature of rubber surface relative
zz't to that of polyimide surface (relative
.+ rubber surface temperature)
:cmg4t
4c3 a .- ' g w t . .E -g -4 c .g_ ' 5 n Z L Z . 6 x&JJ
n3 A
mE W E
+
s 3 s
Conductive heat flux from polyimide
b surface to rubber surface (conductive flux)
C I
12
Rates of generation of heat by friction
on rubber surface, on polyimide surface,
4 and total (rubber friction heat, polyimide
friction heat, and total friction heat)
2
l0 l
I
-4u
I
-6 . ­
0 2 4 6 8 1 0
Time, msec
Figure 12. -Temperatures of rubber surface, conductive heat fluxes across polyimide-rubber interface, and
rates of generation of heat by friction for trace 2, with assumed contact conductance of 56 744 WI (mZ)(K)
or 10 OOO Btul (fl2Nh rM0Fl.
58



=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
1
Trace
0 1
a 2
v 3
1 0 4
I d
-5 I I I I L
3xld
1
Average
conductive
flux
;1 E
E; C2 r Lv
6xId'
- friction
e: : : ]
I­
01
1
I
0
1 2 3 4 5 6xld
Contact conductance, WI (m2)(KI
Figure 13. - Calculated initial rubber temperatures, rates of heat conduction, and rates
of heat generation by friction for assumed values of contact conductance through
interface between polyimide and rubber.
I I I r ,,-;A y p pro lo xi c m a a t t i e ons of plies
Elapsed time,
40
35
15
10 I
Inside wall badt emperature, 281K (46' F)
Air temperature. 278 K (400 F)
I
I I
0 5 10 15 20
Depth from inside wall, mm
Figure 14. -Temperature profiles a ! crown.
59



=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
I--__l..-_I.I-_ I I
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Time from start of test, sec
Figure 15. - Calculated values of wheel drag required to provide energy dissipated by
mechanical hysteresis in tread rubber.
-
Direct ion
Rubber of slide
Hard supporting material
Figure 16. - Forces caused by asperity on rubbing surface.
60 NASA-Langley, 1976 E-8357



=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON. D.C. 20546
POSTAGE AND FEES PAID
~ NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
OFFICIAL BUSINESS SPECIAL FOURTM-CLASS RATE SPACE ADMINISTRATION
PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE $300 451
USMAIL
BOOK
170 001 C 1 U A 760107 S00903DS
DEPT OF THE A I R FORCE
AF WEI\PONS LADOriRTORY
ATTN: TECHNICAL LIBRARY (SIJL)
KIPTLANC APE NM 87117
“The aeronautical and space activities of the United States shall be
.
conducted so as to contribute . . to the expansion of human knowl­
edge of phenomena ifa the atmosphere and space. The Administration
shall provide for the wdest pructicuble and appropriate dissemination
of information concerning its activities and the results thereof.”
-NATIONAL AERONAUTICASND SPACE ACT OF 1958
NASA SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS
TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: Information
technical information considered important, published in a foreign language considered
complete, and a lasting contribution to existing to merit NASA distribution in English.
knowledge.
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS: Information
TECHNICAL NOTES: Information less broad
derived from or of value to NASA activities.
in scope but nevertheless of importance as a
Publications include find reports of major
contribution to existing knowledge.
projects, monographs, data compilations,
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS:
handbooks, sourcebooks, and special
Information receiving limited distribution
bibliographies.
because of preliminary data, security classifica­
tion, or other reasons. Also includes conference
TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION
proceedings with either limited or unlimited
PUBLICATIONS: Information on technology
distribution. - used by NASA that may be of particular
CONTRACTOR REPORTS: Scientific and interest in commercial and other-non-aerospace
technical information generated under a NASA applications. Publications include Tech Briefs,
contract or grant and considered an important Technology Utilization Reports and
contribution to existing knowledge. Technology Surveys.
Details on the availability of these publications may be obtained from:
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION OFFICE
N A T I O N A L AERONAUTICS A N D SPACE A D M I N I S T R A T I O N
Washington, D.C. 20546
