=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
NASA Technical Paper 3573
j,/ y
Computational Methods for Frictional Contact
With Applications to the Space Shuttle Orbiter
Nose-Gear Tire
Comparisons of Experimental Measurements and Analytical
Predictions
John A. Tanner
May 1996



=== PDF PAGE 2 ===




=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
NASA Technical Paper 3573
Computational Methods for Frictional Contact
With Applications to the Space Shuttle Orbiter
Nose-Gear Tire
Comparisons of Experimental Measurements and Analytical
Predictions
John A. Tanner
Langley Research Center • Hampton, Virginia
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Langley Research Center • Hampton, Virginia 23681-0001
May 1996



=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgment
This report is based on a dissertation submitted to the faculty of
the school of Engineering and Applied Sciences of The George
Washington University in partial satisfaction of the requirements for
the degree of Doctor of Science.
Available electronically at the following URL address: http://techreports.larc.nasa.gov/ltrs/Itrs.html
Printed copies available from the following:
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
800 Elkridge Landing Road 5285 Port Royal Road
Linthicum Heights, MD 21090-2934 Springfield, VA 22161-2171
(301) 621-0390 (703) 487-4650



=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Contents
Abstract ........................................................................... 1
Introduction ....................................................................... 1
Objectives and Scope .............................................................. 2
Nomenclature ...................................................................... 2
Geometric and Stiffness Characteristics of Space Shuttle Orbiter Nose-Gear Tire ................. 3
Tire Description ................................................................... 3
Modeling of Tire Geometry ......................................................... 3
Evaluation of Stiffness Coefficients of Two-Dimensional Shell Model ........................ 4
Experimental Measurements .......................................................... 5
Measurements of Inflated Cross-Sectional Profile and Vertical Load-Deflection Response ........ 5
Close-range photogrammetry measurements ........................................... 5
Static vertical load-deflection measurements ........................................... 5
Tire Footprint Geometry ............................................................ 6
Footprint length and width measurements under static loading conditions .................... 6
Footprint area measurements under static loading conditions .............................. 6
Tire Footprint Load Intensities ....................................................... 6
Tire footprint-force transducer ...................................................... 6
Tire footprint areas and load intensity measurement procedures ........................... 6
Symmetries exhibited by Space Shuttle nose-gear tire footprint ............................ 7
Contour plots ................................................................... 7
Normal footprint load intensities .................................................... 7
Tangential load intensities in lateral direction .......................................... 7
Tangential load intensities in fore and aft direction ...................................... 8
Numerical Results and Correlation With Experimental Results ............................... 8
Description of Finite-Element Models ................................................. 8
Correlation Between Analytical Results and Experimental Measurements ..................... 9
Tire response to inflation-pressure loading ............................................ 9
Tire load-deflection and load-contact-area characteristics ................................ 9
Tire contact load-intensity distributions ............................................. 10
Influence of Model Refinement on Predicted Contact Load-Intensity Distributions ............. 11
Effect of Tread Grooves and Friction on Predicted Contact Load-Intensity Distributions ........ 11
Strain Energy Density Distributions .................................................. 12
Conclusions ...................................................................... 12
Appendix--Fundamental Equations of Shell Theory Used in Present Study .................... 14
References ....................................................................... 16
Tables ........................................................................... 18
Figures .......................................................................... 21
ill



=== PDF PAGE 6 ===




=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Abstract
A computational procedure is presented for the solution of frictional contact
problems for aircraft tires. A Space Shuttle nose-gear tire is modeled using a two-
dimensional laminated anisotropic shell theory which includes the effects of varia-
tions in material and geometric parameters, transverse-shear deformation, and
geometric nonlinearities. Contact conditions are incorporated into the formulation by
using a perturbed Lagrangian approach with the fundamental unknowns consisting of
the stress resultants, the generalized displacements, and the Lagrange multipliers
associated with both contact and friction conditions. The contact-friction algorithm is
based on a modified Coulomb friction law. A modified two-field, mixed-variational
principle is used to obtain elemental arrays. This modification consists of augmenting
the functional of that principle by two terms: the Lagrange multiplier vector associ-
ated with normal and tangential node contact-load intensities and a regularization
term that is quadratic in the Lagrange multiplier vector. These capabilities and com-
putational features are incorporated into an in-house computer code. Experimental
measurements were taken to define the response of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire to
inflation-pressure loads and to combined inflation-pressure loads and static normal
loads against a rigid flat plate. These experimental results describe the meridional
growth of the tire cross section caused by inflation loading, the static load-deflection
characteristics of the tire, the geometry of the tire footprint under static loading con-
ditions, and the normal and tangential load-intensity distributions in the tire footprint
for the various static vertical-loading conditions. Numerical results were obtained for
the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to inflation-pressure loads and combined
inflation-pressure and contact loads against a rigid flat plate. The experimental mea-
surements and the numerical results are compared.
Introduction strong enough to cause tire failures during individual
landing operations (refs. 5 and 6). Therefore, an under-
Contact-friction problems are inherently nonlinear
standing of these tire friction forces and the resulting slip
and path dependent. Nonlinearity occurs partly because
velocities is critical to the design of aircraft tires for the
both the contact area and the contact-load intensities are
next generation of high-performance aircraft, such as the
not known beforehand and vary during the loading National Aero-Space Plane and the High-Speed Civil
history. Path dependency is a result of the nonconserva-
Transport.
tive (irreversible dissipative) character of the frictional
forces. Modeling contact phenomena in the tire footprint is a
formidable task partly because of difficulty of modeling
A review of static contact problems presented in ref-
tire response. Distribution of tractions and the footprint
erence 1, which includes a bibliography of approxi-
geometry are both functions of the normal, frictional, and
mately 700 papers, points out that contact problems are
inflation tire loads. Moreover, the complex mechanisms
important to thermomechanical stress analyses, fracture
of dynamic friction, which allow the tire to develop the
mechanics, mechanical problems involving elastic foun-
necessary steering and braking forces for aircraft control
dations, the mechanics of joints, geomechanics, and tires.
during ground operations, are not fully understood
Contact problems occupy a position of special (ref. 7). The tire analyst thus is forced to choose among
importance in aircraft tire mechanics because the contact several friction theories. When the tire contact problem
zone is where the forces are generated to support, guide, includes frictional effects, the solution becomes path
and maneuver the airplane. Distributions of contact loads dependent and a unique solution is not guaranteed.
and frictional forces define the moments and shears that
are applied to the landing gear system (ref. 2). Under The aircraft tire is a composite structure of rubber
rolling conditions, the distribution of sliding velocities and textile constituents that exhibit anisotropic and non-
within the tire footprint combined with the frictional homogeneous material properties. Normal tire operating
forces developed by the tire defines the rate of energy conditions create loads that can produce large deforma-
dissipation associated with the loading conditions and tions. Elevated operating temperatures from the com-
provides a measure of tire wear (refs. 3 and 4). In the bined effects of material hysteresis and frictional heating
case of the Space Shuttle orbiter, this wear mechanism is can cause variations in the material characteristics of the



=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
tireconstituents
(refs. 8-10). The laminated carcass of Numerical studies presented for an inflated Space
the aircraft tire is thick enough to allow significant Shuttle nose-gear tire under static load on a flat surface
transverse-shear deformations. demonstrate the capabilities of the analysis techniques.
These analyses incorporate both friction and frictionless
These facts and attendant difficulties emphasize the contact. Detailed studies are made of the effects of tire
need to develop modeling strategies and analysis
tread pattern on the contact-force intensities, the influ-
methods that include efficient, powerful and ence of friction coefficient variations on the distribution
economical contact algorithms. Intense research has
of tire contact-force intensities, the convergence charac-
recently focused on nonlinear analyses of static and
teristics of the contact algorithm, and the history of
dynamic problems involving contact. Novel techniques
energy dissipation in the static footprint.
that have emerged from these efforts include semi-
analytic finite-element models for nonlinear analysis of Experimental measurements were carried out on the
shells of revolution (refs. 11 and 12), reduced methods Space Shuttle orbiter nose-gear tire to define its response
(refs. 13 and 14), and operator splitting techniques to combined inflation-pressure and static vertical-loading
(refs. 15-17). References 14, 17, and 18 summarize conditions. This report discusses experimental proce-
applications of these new tire modeling techniques. dures used to define the tire structural response to load-
ing conditions and to measure the footprint-force
Objectives and Scope intensities and empirical procedures used to define the
geometry and construction details of the tire for model-
Langley tire modeling research concentrates on ing purposes. Finally, the analytical results are compared
developing an accurate and efficient strategy for predict- with the experimental measurements.
ing aircraft tire responses to a variety of loading condi-
tions. This research focuses on developing tire contact This report describes numerical studies, experimen-
modeling techniques, and the specific objectives of this tal measurements, and comparisons between analytical
research are (I) to develop a contact algorithm with fric- results and experimental measurements. Reference 27
tion effects included to predict tire response to combined describes development of this contact algorithm.
inflation-pressure and static vertical-loading conditions,
(2) to demonstrate the capabilities of this algorithm Nomenclature
through numerical studies, and (3) to validate these
cij, dij,._j tire stiffness coefficients (i, j = 1, 2, 6)
numerical results with experimental data. Distribution of
normal and frictional forces in the tire contact zone (or d nylon cord diameter
footprint area) is of particular interest.
El, E2 Young' s moduli
The contact algorithm is incorporated into a E, Gc nylon cord moduli
mixed-formulation, two-field, two-dimensional finite-
element model based on the moderate-rotation E, Gr rubber moduli
Sanders-Budiansky shell theory, including the effects of G23, GI3, G12 shear moduli
transverse-shear deformations, laminated anisotropic L volume fraction of nylon cord
material response, and nonhomogeneous shell character-
h total thickness of tire
istics (refs. 19 and 20). A perturbed Lagrangian formula-
tion (refs. 21 and 22) is the basis for this contact
hk thickness of individual tire plies
algorithm. The Lagrangian formulation uses the pre-
n normal vector to reference surface
conditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) iteration proce-
dure (refs. 23-25) to determine contact area, distribution P0 intensity of inflation pressure
of normal-force intensities, and allocation of friction-
RI, R2 principal radii of curvature in meridional
force intensities. A modified version of the Coulomb
and circumferential directions
friction law is incorporated into the contact algorithm in
which the friction coefficient at the onset of sliding is normal distance from tire axis to reference
surface
different from that during sliding. This algorithm also
monitors the energy dissipated within the sliding portion shell coordinates of tire
of the contact zone. In this investigation it will be
assumed that the tire is loaded on a surface that is much displacement components of reference
surface of tire in meridional, circumferen-
stiffer than the tire, thus the surface will be treated as
tial, and normal directions (see fig. 1)
rigid. Hence, the static tire contact problem will be
treated as a unilateral contact problem. Reference 26 normal displacement at e = 0 = 0 (see
summarizes the characteristics of this algorithm. fig. 7)



=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
two-dimensional position vector (see vertical-loading conditions. These sections also present
eq. (3)) an evaluation of the tire stiffness characteristics.
Y data vector
Modeling of Tire Geometry
x, y, z Cartesian coordinate system
extensional strains of tire reference surface A Space Shuttle nose-gear tire was cut into sections
E l , E2, Es,
and used to obtain accurate measurements of the cross-
v-.0,2es0
sectional profile of an uninflated tire. A smoothed spline
2£s3, 2E03 transverse-shear strains of tire under tension was used to fit a curve through the mea-
shear strains of tire reference surface sured coordinates of the cross-sectional profile in a least-
Y23, Y13, Y12
squares sense. (See refs. 28 and 29.) Because of symme-
Poisson' s ratio
Vl2, V21
try, only half the cross section was modeled. A piecewise
1_l , I_2 curvatures (see eq. (6)) linear and continuous estimate of the second derivative
Ks, _0, 2_s0 bending strains of tire d2x/dz 2 was required by the cubic spline function, and
this was achieved by adjusting the standard deviations of
ff tension factor (see eq. (1))
the measured profile at the data points. The second deriv-
O' normalized tension factor ative with the effect of tension included is denoted by
01 , 0 2 elongation stresses of tire
0 circumferential (hoop) coordinate of tire
X(S)-G2X(S) IX(Si) 2 7Si+l-fS
(see fig. 1) = -0 yiJ_/+(_Si
nylon cord orientation angle (see eq. (22))
dimensionless coordinate along meridian + [X(Si+ l) - 2 Yi+ljsi+l ] _ _ S L-_Si i (1)
(see fig. 4)
rotation about normal to tire reference sur- for (S i <--S <--Si+ 1) where x = [x(s), z(s)] is the position
vector for points along the segment, Yi = [x, z]i is the
face (see eq. (A9))
corresponding data at point i, and a dot over a symbol
d_s,_0 rotational components of reference surface denotes a derivative with respect to s. The chordal length
of tire (see fig. 1) (polygonal arc length) si is given by the following
shear stresses of tire equation:
"[23, "[13, "t12
Geometric and Stiffness Characteristics of
Space Shuttle Orbiter Nose-Gear Tire E 211' (2)
Sl=O ]
Si Si - 1 + (Xi -- Xi - 1)2 + (Z i _ Zi _ 1)
Tire Description
Numerical studies conducted assess the accuracy of After solving equation (1) for x(s) and replacing x(si)
the two-dimensional shell tire model, effectiveness of the
with Yi, the following expression is obtained:
proposed computational procedure, and performance of
the contact algorithm. The 32 x 8.8, type VII, 16-ply-
rating Space Shuttle orbiter nose-gear tire was modeled
during these studies as a two-dimensional laminated shell x(s) = +
with variable thickness and variable stiffness characteris- sinhff(si+ 1-si) si+ 1-si
tics. The outer surface of the tire was used as the refer-
ence surface of the shell model. Figure 1 gives geometric
characteristics of the tire. The tire carcass is constructed + + (3)
of 10 lamina of nylon and rubber with an additional rein- sinhff(si + I - si) si + 1- si
forcing ply beneath the tire tread. (See fig. 2.) The tire
Upon differentiating equation (3) and equating right-
has a three-groove tread pattern. The rated load for the
and left-side derivatives at si (for i = 2, 3..... I - 1), a set
tire is 15 000 lbf at an inflation pressure of 320 psi. All
of linear algebraic equations for x(si) is obtained. With
experiments and analyses were conducted at an inflation
the assumption of a nonperiodic spline function in which
pressure of 300 psi.
the slopes at s I and sI are given, the tridiagonal differen-
The following sections describe the empirical proce- tial equation is easily solved. Once the second deriva-
dures used to establish the tire geometry and to define the tives at point i = 1, 2..... 1 are obtained, the first and
global elastic response of the tire to inflation and static second derivatives at the interpolation points x(s) and



=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
_(s) areevaluatebdydifferentiatinegquatio(n3).Refer-
individual carcass plies was measured at the interfaces
ence2s9-31giveadetaileddescriptioonfsplinesmooth-
between the regions and these values are given in table 1.
ingtechniques. A linear variation was assumed for the thickness within
A normalizetdensionfactoris usedtoeliminatea each region. Thickness of the tire tread and sidewall cov-
nonlineabrehaviobrysetting(seeref.32) eting was computed by subtracting the sum of the indi-
vidual ply thicknesses from the total thickness of the
carcass at each location.
t3($ l -- Sl)
o' - (4)
1-1 Material properties of the different plies were
obtained with the mechanics of materials approach,
In practice, if this factor is less than 0.001, the resulting
which is widely applied to rigid composites. (See refs. 33
curve is approximately a cubic spline; if it is greater than
and 34.) Table 2 presents elastic constants of the tire
50, the curve is nearly piecewise linear. It should be
constituents used in this study. It was assumed that nylon
noted that the variable s in equations (1)--(4) is not the
cords of two different diameters were used in the
actual arc length but the chordal length approximation of
construction of the tire. In region I, d = 0.022 in. for the
s. Thus, the accuracy of the arc length approximation is a
bottom two plies and the tread reinforcement, and d =
function of the number of points used in the smoothing
0.031 in. for all other plies. Table 3 gives cord end counts
procedure.
(epi) for individual plies at the region interfaces. A linear
Computed arc length s, coordinates x and z, and first variation was assumed for epi within each region.
and second derivatives x(s) and x(s) are used to evalu-
Stress-strain relationships of the individual ortho-
ate the various geometric parameters of the tire.
tropic and unidirectional layers are given by
Normal vector:
O 1 Cll C!2 • • • E l
n = _sin_l : _J(dxlds)2+(dzlds)2 (5) O 2 c12 c22 • • • E2
(8)
[cos_] ] -ddxz//ddss 1 %23 • C44 • • ]t23
L_[(dxlds) 2 + (dzlds) 2 '_13 e • • c55 • TI3
Curvatures: "C12 • • • C66 ]t12
1 _cos3,(d2xl where the reduced stiffnesses c.g are given by
x:, - R1 - k_z2j (6)
E l
- (9)
Cll 1 - VI2V21
_ 1 _ cos_ (7)
K2 R 2 x
ElV21
- (1o)
Figure 3 presents the resulting geometric characteris-
c12 1 -VI2V21
tics of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Thicknesses of
the tire carcass at the node points of the finite-element
E 2
model were computed along the normal vector to the tire - (11)
reference (outer) surface by locating the points of inter- c22 1 - VI2V21
section of the normal vectors with the inner surface of the
tire carcass. To facilitate these computations the tire c44 = G23 (12)
inner surface was approximated by a set of third-degree
polynomials. c55 = G13 (13)
Evaluation of Stiffness Coefficients of
c66 = GI2 (14)
Two-Dimensional Shell Model
The cord-rubber composite was treated as a lami- Elastic constants are computed by the law of mix-
nated material. For the purpose of computing stiffness tures (see ref. 34)
variations in the meridional direction, the tire model was
divided into seven regions. (See fig. 2.) Thickness of the El = Ecfc + Er(1 -fc) (15)
4



=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
vl2= v_/c+vAl-fc) (16) Measurements of Inflated Cross-Sectional Profile
and Vertical Load-Deflection Response
Er[Ec(1 + 2fc)+ 2Er( 1-fc)] Close-range photogrammetry measurements. Close-
E2 = Ec(l -fc)+2Er( 1+0.5fc ) (17) range photogrammetry techniques were used to define
the inflated profile of the Space Shuttle orbiter nose-gear
tire. To facilitate these measurements, 209 circular,
Gr[Gc+Gr+(Gc-Gr)fcl
reflective targets were attached to the Space Shuttle
GI2 = GI3 = [Gc+Gr_(Gc_Gr)fc ] (18)
nose-gear tire as shown schematically in figure 5. Tar-
gets were aligned along 19 meridional lines of the tire
G23 = 0.6G12 (19) sidewall and a video camera was used to record the target
positions from 10 different camera locations. A stereo-
photography triangulation technique (refs. 35 and 36)
v 12E2
(20) was used to define the location of each target in a global
V21 - El coordinate system from these video images. The root
mean square (rms) measurement accuracies were found
where subscripts c and r represent the quantities of the to be 1.3 mils, 2.9 mils, and 1.5 mils in the x-, y-, and
z-coordinate directions, respectively.
nylon cord and the rubber, respectively, andfc is the vol-
ume fraction of the nylon cord The same triangulation techniques were used to
assess the ability of the loading fixture to subject the tire
rtd2(epi) and wheel to a pure vertical load. Results of this triangu-
(21)
fc - 4h k lation study (illustrated in table below) indicate that there
is a significant misalignment in the loading fixture that
must be taken into account when analyzing the experi-
where d is cord diameter, hk is layer thickness, and epi is mental results.
cord end count (in ends per inch).
Fore and aft Lateral Vertical
Stress-strain relationships of the two-dimensional
displacement displacement displacement
shell were obtained by first transforming the stiffness of
0.09 in. -0.02 in. 1.42 in.
each of the individual layers to the global shell coordi-
nates s and 0 and then integrating these coefficients
through the thickness. Table 4 gives cord orientations in Figure 6 shows unloaded and loaded profiles of a
the individual plies of each region. The following for- portion of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire sidewall. The
mula was used to determine Ok , the angle (in degrees) intersections of the lines in figure 6 denote the locations
measured from the s-axis to the 0-axis, at the numerical of the photogrammetry targets shown in figure 5. The
quadrature points: dashed lines represent the tire sidewall geometry under a
uniform inflation-pressure loading of 300 psi. The solid
lines in the figure represent the tire sidewall geometry
= max[(54.382 - 3.884_ - 148.96_2) °, 33 °] (22)
when the inflated tire is loaded onto a rigid, flat plate.
For this static-loaded case, the tire cross section was
where _ is the dimensionless coordinate along the tire deflected approximately 1.42 in. in the direction normal
meridian.
to the surface. Three data points are missing for the
loaded case because the flat plate that the tire was loaded
The appendix gives the resulting shell constitutive
against interfered with the field-of-view of the camera.
relations. Figure 4 shows meridional variations of the
Data in figure 6 indicate that the tire sidewall in the
stiffness coefficients.
vicinity of contact bulges outward radially under the
influence of the vertical load.
Experimental Measurements
Static vertical load-deflection measurements. Static
A substantial experimental program has been under- vertical load-deflection tests conducted on the inflated
way at Langley for several years to obtain measurements Space Shuttle nose-gear tire provide a global measure of
of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire response to various tire elastic response. For these tests the tire was slowly
loading conditions. The following sections describe these lowered onto the flat plate until a maximum vertical load
experimental measurements and the techniques used to of approximately 30000 Ibf was obtained and then
obtain them. slowly unloaded until the tire lost contact with the



=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
surfaceD. uringthisloadingprocesasn
x-y plotter was Footprint area measurements under static loading
used to monitor the resulting tire hysteresis loop. (See conditions. Figure 11 plots the footprint area of the
fig. 7.) The resulting load-deflection curve indicates that Space Shuttle nose-gear tire as a function of the applied
the nonlinear response of the tire is similar to a hardening vertical load. Numerical integration techniques were
spring. The hysteresis loop provides a measure of the used to acquire the area measurements for each of the tire
damping of the tire, but for this study the damping term footprints at various vertical-loading conditions. For
was omitted. each footprint, two measurements were taken. The first
measurement was obtained by computing the total area
Tire Footprint Geometry enclosed in the tire contact zone, including the tread
groove area(s). These data are denoted by the circular
Reference 37 presents data on the footprint geometry symbols in figure 11 and are referred to as the gross foot-
for a number of tires, including the Space Shuttle print areas. The second measurement was obtained by
nose-gear tire. The footprint shapes were obtained by computing the contact area of the individual contact
applying a mixture of lightweight oil and graphite pow- lobes independently. These measurements, denoted by
der on the tire tread area and statically loading the tire at the square symbols in figure 11, are referred to as the net
preselected vertical loads onto posterboard affixed to the footprint areas and exclude the tread groove area(s) for
rigid flat plate. The following paragraphs provide infor- each footprint. Both the gross and net footprint areas
mation on the measured geometric characteristics of the increase in a linear fashion as the vertical load is
Space Shuttle nose-gear tire footprints obtained over a increased over the range of loads investigated. The linear
range of vertical-loading conditions at an inflation pres- least-squares curve fit to each data set, along with its
sure of 300 psi. equation, is presented in figure 11.
Figure 12 plots the ratio of net to gross footprint
Footprint length and width measurements under areas for the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire as a function of
static loading conditions. Figure 8 plots the length of the vertical load. The data in figure 12 indicate that the ratio
Space Shuttle nose-gear tire footprint as a function of of net to gross footprint areas is nearly constant over the
vertical load. The symbols denote the specific incremen- range of vertical-loading conditions tested. This ratio is
tal load applications ranging from 2000 lbf to 30 000 lbf. approximately 0.8 for the 2000-1bf load case and about
The line through the points represents a cubic least- 0.81 for the 30000-1bf load case.
squares curve fit to the data. Figure 8 also lists the equa-
tion representing the curve fit. Footprint length grew
Tire Footprint Load Intensities
from slightly over 4 in. at a load of 2000 lbf to approxi-
mately 14 in. at 30 000 lbf. The data indicate that the rate
Tire footprint-force transducer. Reference 37 de-
of increase in footprint length decreases as the vertical
scribes the tire footprint-force transducer used to obtain
load increases.
triaxial measurements in the contact region of the stati-
cally loaded Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. The force
Figure 9 plots the width of the Space Shuttle
transducer includes 10 beam-columns spaced 1.36 in.
nose-gear tire footprint as a function of vertical load. from center to center with a 0.25 in2 surface area. Each
Various incremental loads between 2000 lbf and
beam-column was instrumented to measure force compo-
30000 lbf are denoted by the circular symbols in
nents in the normal and the two tangential directions. The
figure 9, and the cubic least-squares curve fit to the data
two tangential forces represent the components of the
is denoted by the line through the points. The equation of
friction forces in the footprint.
the curve fit is included in figure 9. Footprint width
grows from slightly more than 2 in. at the 2000-1bf nor- The beam-columns measure total force within the
mal load case to a maximum width of about 7 in. at the beam-column contact surface. It should be noted that the
30 000-1bf loading condition. Data presented in figure 9 instrumentation could not distinguish between distrib-
indicate that the rate of growth in footprint width dimin- uted loads and concentrated loads at discrete points. For
ishes as the vertical load increases. the purpose of this investigation, the forces were
assumed to be distributed load intensities over the net
Figure 10 plots footprint width for the Space Shuttle contact area of the individual beam-columns.
nose-gear tire as a function of footprint length. Data pre-
sented in this fashion indicate that there is a linear rela- llre footprint areas and load intensity measure-
tionship between the length and width of the Space mentprocedures. Figure 13 shows schematically the tire
Shuttle nose-gear tire over the range of vertical loads footprint areas and the map of tire footprint-force trans-
investigated. The least-squares equation expressing this ducer locations used to obtain the data with the Space
relationship is shown in figure 10. Shuttle nose-gear tire for three distinct vertical-loading



=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
cases2:000lbf,15000Ibf,and30000lbf.Thesequence
symmetry rather than reflective symmetry. The misalign-
oftestingplacesthetirefootprint-forcteransducoenr top
ments of the rotated dashed footprint outline relative to
of therigid flat platewiththerow of beam-columns
the solid footprint outline are a function of both the
alignedwiththemeridionacloordinatoef thetire.The
uncertainty of the footprint outline from the scrubbing
transducewrasinitiallypositioneadtapproximatetlhye during the loading history and imperfections in the tire
centeorf thefootprintT. heloadwasthenappliedincre- construction.
mentallyuptothemaximumloadof 30000lbf,anddata
wererecordedfor eachvertical-loadiningcremenFt.or Contour plots. Figures 15-17 present contour plots
succeedinlgoad applicationsth, e tire footprint-force of measured tire footprint load intensities in the normal
transducewrasmovedeitherforwardor and two tangential directions. Figure 13 shows the loca-
aft at half-inch
tion of the sensors used to obtain these load-intensity
increments in the footprint so that the entire footprint
measurements. Caution should be exercised when inter-
region was eventually covered.
preting this contour information because the contour pat-
In figure 13 the map of the tire footprint-force trans- terns are sensitive to the sensor locations that were used
to obtain the measurements. Note that for the 2000-1bf
ducer locations is superimposed on the tire footprint. A
trial-and-error iterative process was used to make small and 15000-1bf load cases the data used to produce the
adjustments in positioning the transducer map on the tire contour plots were derived from a single row of sensors
footprint shapes. The final position of the transducer map for each tire footprint contact lobe. For the 30000-1bf
shown in figure 13 is consistent with the pattern of non- load case a single row of sensors was used for the two
zero force measurements for the various vertical-load inner lobes and a double row of sensors was employed
cases reported in reference 37. The footprint shapes and for the outer lobes. The solid lines outlining the contour
the transducer outlines are drawn to scale in figure 13. It plots represent the experimentally-determined footprint
should be noted, however, that there is some uncertainty areas for each load case.
in the definition of the experimental footprint areas out-
Normal footprint load intensities. Figure 15 pre-
lines from forces such as scrubbing (or squirm) in the sents the distribution of normal load intensities in the
footprint areas during the application of the static vertical
form of contour plots for normal loads of 2000 Ibf,
loads.
15 000 lbf, and 30000 lbf. Rated load for the Space Shut-
tle nose-gear tire is 15 000 lbf at an inflation pressure of
Figure 13 also identifies the centers of contact for
each beam-column and the percentage of actual contact 320 psi. For the 2000-1bf normal load case (fig. 15(a))
for each beam-column that experienced less than full peak normal load intensity is between 450 and 500 psi.
contact, i.e., loss of contact at the edge of the footprint or At this loading condition only the two inner tread ribs (or
in the vicinity of tread grooves. This information was lobes) are in contact with the surface. At a normal load of
used to convert the transducer-force measurements into 15 000 lbf, the tire contact zone expands to include the
load intensity by dividing each normal- or tangential- two outer tread ribs. (See fig. 15(b).) Maximum normal
force measurement by the appropriate beam-column con- load intensity for the 15 000-1bf load case is also 450 psi
tact area. The information in figure 13 also defines the to 500 psi, but the footprint area of the tire increases sub-
stantially over the 2000-1bf load case footprint.
contact boundary along the footprint periphery and along
the edges of the tread grooves. Thus, each tire tread con- The contour plot in figure 15(c) for the 30000-1bf
tact area (the ribs between the tread grooves) was treated normal load condition indicates the presence of a local-
as an independent zone or lobe of contact. ized maximum load intensity along the outer edge of one
of the outside circumferential tread grooves, and is
Symmetries exhibited by Space Shuttle nose-gear
shown in the bottom right corner of the tire contact zone
tire footprint. Figure 14 shows the symmetry exhibited
in figure 15(c). This peak load intensity ranges between
in the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire contact area. For each
650 psi and 700 psi. In the center of the outer contact
vertical-loading condition, the tire footprint is shown two
lobes the normal load intensities range between 500 psi
ways. The first plot shows the mirror image of the left
and 550 psi, and in the center of the inner lobes the nor-
half of the tire footprint (denoted by the dashed outline)
mal load intensities range between 400 psi and 450 psi
superimposed over the fight half of the footprint. The for the 30000-1bf normal load condition. These maxi-
second plot shows the image of the left half of the tire
mum load intensities are equal in magnitude to approxi-
footprint (denoted by the dashed outline) rotated by 180 °
mately 150 percent to 180 percent of the inflation
about the centroid of contact superimposed over the right
pressure.
half of the footprint. The centroids of the contact areas
are denoted by the plus signs in figure 13. The data pre- Tangential load intensities in lateral direction. Fig-
sented in figure 14 indicate that the footprint of the Space ure 16 shows the lateral friction load-intensity distribu-
Shuttle nose-gear tire exhibits rotational or inversion tions for the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. For the



=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
2000-1bnformalloadcase(fig.16(a)),thelateraflriction
72 psi to 84 psi. About one quarter of the tire contact area
load-intensitymeasuremenitnsdicatenegativeload
is subjected to negative drag friction load intensities, and
intensitieosf-24 psito-30 psionthebottomcontact
the remaining three quarters of the tire footprint are sub-
lobeanda maximumpositivelateralloadintensityof
jected to positive drag friction load intensities. Positive
6psito 12psiontheuppercontacltobe.Theselateral-
drag friction load intensities are minimum at the center
tractionloadintensitiersetardthelateralgrowthof the
of contact for each of the normal load cases. (See
tirefootprintL. ossofskewsymmetryinthelateraflric-
figs. 17(a)-(c).)
tionload-intensidtyistributionforthe2000-1blofadcase
is attributedtothemisalignmenint theloadingfixture
Numerical Results and Correlation With
whichalloweda slightlateraldisplacemeonft thetire
Experimental Results
duringapplicationof the normalload.Arrowsin
figure16(a)indicatethe directionsof tire deflection
associatewdiththismisalignmenWt.henthenormalload Description of Finite-Element Models
isincreasetdo 15000lbf (fig.16(b))t,hemagnitudoef
To develop the finite-element models used in the
thepeaklateraflrictionloadintensityisalsoincreasetod
analysis of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire, the cubic
75psito90psiandthefourcontacltobesexhibiat distri-
spline approximation of the outer meridional surface of
butionoflateralloadintensitiewshichfeatureasnalter-
the tire half cross section was discretized into 75
natingsequencoef positiveandnegativeload-intensity
potential node points. (See fig. 18.) From this population
regionsA. t 30000lbf (fig.16(c))peaklateralfriction
of possible nodes, a smaller number of nodes was chosen
loadintensitieasreincreasetdo125psito150psiandthe
to approximate the tire cross section. To model the tire
alternatinbgandsof positiveandnegativesurfacetrac-
inflation response, a single strip of 30 finite elements was
tionsareespeciallpyrominenLt.ossof skewsymmetry
used to approximate the complete tire cross section. This
inthelateraflrictionloadintensitieiss notasobvioufsor
model employed 61 nodes to characterize the tire
thelargernormalloadcaseassit isforthe2000-1bnfor-
meridian, and there were a total of 480 stress-resultant
malloadcaseP. eaklateraflrictionloadintensitieosccur
parameters and 293 nonzero generalized-displacement
nearthelaterael xtremitieosf thetire footprinftor the
parameters to synthesize the tire inflation response.
loadconditionisnvestigated.
Finite-element models employed to analyze the con-
tact behavior and friction characteristics of the Space
Tangential load intensities in fore and aft
Shuttle nose-gear tire used 41 node points in one half of a
direction. Figure 17 shows measured fore and aft tangen-
meridional cross section (81 nodes for the entire cross
tial (or drag) friction load-intensity distributions for the
section) and these nodes are denoted as the circular sym-
Space Shuttle nose-gear tire inflated to 300 psi. For the
bols in figure 18. Nodes associated with the circumferen-
2000-1bf normal load case shown in figure 17(a), drag
tial tread grooves are also highlighted in figure 18. In the
friction load-intensity measurements indicate that posi-
meridional direction, the tread area of the tire was mod-
tive load intensities are present in both contact lobes and
eled with the highest density of nodes and the sidewall
peak positive load intensities of 10 psi to 15 psi are
and bead areas were modeled with progressively fewer
located about 1 in. left of the center of contact. Fore and
nodes. This meridional node pattern was used for each of
aft extremities of the tire footprint exhibit negative drag
the two-dimensional finite-element tire models employed
friction load intensities ranging up to -15 psi. Positive
in this investigation. The circumference of the tire was
load intensities retard forward displacement of the tire
divided into 240 possible node points and a smaller num-
footprint associated with misalignment of the loading
ber of nodes was chosen from that population to con-
fixture. Arrows in figure 17(a) indicate the directions of
struct the tire finite-element models. To refine the mesh
tire deflection associated with this misalignment. At a
in specific areas such as the contact zone, a higher den-
normal load of 15 000 lbf (fig. 17(b)) drag friction load
sity of nodes was chosen from the population in the spe-
intensities increase to a maximum positive value of
cific region of interest.
32 psi to 40 psi in the two inner lobes about 3 in. on
either side of the contact center. Maximum negative drag Figure 19 shows a map of elements and node loca-
friction load intensities of-8 psi to -16 psi are observed tions for one of the models used to analyze the contact
near the fight edge of contact in the two center lobes in problem. Figure 19 shows an array of elements, with 40
figure 17(b) and there is a sharp transition between posi- elements in the meridional direction and 18 elements in
tive and negative forces about 4 in. right of the center of the circumferential direction. Numbers in the left and
contact. When normal force is increased to 30000 Ibf right margin of the figure denote the beginning and end-
(fig. 17(c)) the transition between positive and negative ing element numbers in specific rows. Black dots super-
drag friction load intensities is very prominent. Peak drag imposed over the square grid of elements denote the
friction load intensities, both positive and negative, are individual nodes of the finite-element model. Several



=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
individualelementsare shadedand shownin
an a number of tire cross sections (denoted by the different
expanded scale to illustrate the node numbering sequence symbols) are compared with the model predictions in fig-
that was used to minimize the bandwidth for the ure 21. These results clearly illustrate the axisymmetric
finite-element models. The complicating factor here is characteristics of the tire response to inflation loads. Ref-
that the elements in the circumferential direction are erence 38 presents additional information on inflation
joined along the top and bottom edge. The numbering pressure results.
scheme that is illustrated in the example shown in figure
19 provides a minimum bandwidth for this tire model. Tire load-deflection and load-contact-area charac-
For this specific example the bandwidth is 1635. The six teristics. One global measure of tire response to static
rows of elements in the middle of the array, containing contact loading is the normal load-deflection curve. Fig-
elements 1 through 240, comprise the possible contact ure 22 presents measured and calculated normal load-
region for this model. Also shown in figure 19 is the deflection curves for the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire
location of the circumferential tread grooves of the Space inflated to 300 psi and loaded against a flat plate. The
Shuttle nose-gear tire. measured load-deflection curve is denoted by square
symbols in figure 22 and a quadratic curve is used to fair
Three different models were used in the analysis of the measurements in a least-squares fashion. The calcu-
the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire in contact with a flat lated load-deflection response of the tire was obtained by
plate. These models, denoted as model 1, model 2, and taking the product of the predicted normal load intensi-
model 3, are depicted in figure 20. Each model employed fies and the calculated contact area at each contact node
480 elements in the region outside the contact zone and summing them over all contact nodes. Circular sym-
(0 < -0.2r_, 0 > 0.2rt). Model 1 includes 240 elements in bols denote the predicted load-deflection response based
the contact region of the tire (-0.27t < 0 < 0.2r0 for a total on the Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation of the
of 720 elements. (See fig. 19.) Model 1 includes 14076 contact areas associated with each contact node. Triangu-
nonzero generalized displacement parameters, 23040 lar symbols denote the predicted load-deflection
stress resultant parameters, and 3159 contact load- response based on the contact area algorithm described in
intensity parameters. Model 2 used a refined mesh within reference 27. Both calculation procedures perform well
the contact region, with 480 contact elements and a total in matching the measured normal tire load-deflection
of 960 elements. Model 2 includes 18 776 nonzero gener- response, but the calculation procedure based on the con-
alized displacement parameters, 30 720 stress resultant tact area algorithm appears to be more accurate over the
parameters, and 6075 contact load-intensity parameters. load range analyzed.
Model 3 employed a more refined mesh in the contact
zone, with 960 contact elements and a total of 1440 ele- A second global measure of tire response to static
contact loading is the normal-load-contact-area behavior.
ments. Model 3 employed 28 152 generalized displace-
ment parameters, 46 080 stress resultant parameters, and Figures 23 and 24 present measured and calculated
normal-load-contact-area characteristics of the Space
11 907 contact load-intensity parameters. A single itera-
Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to static contact loading
tion for model 1required about 12 min on a Cray 2 com-
against a flat plate. In figure 23 measured and predicted
puter, and a single iteration for model 3 required about
12 min on a Cray Y-MP computer. net footprint areas are plotted as a function of the applied
normal load. Net footprint area is defined as the sum of
the contact areas of the individual tire tread ribs or lobes
Correlation Between Analytical Results and
(see fig. 15, for example) and excludes the areas associ-
Experimental Measurements
ated with the circumferential grooves. In figure 24 the
gross footprint areas are plotted as a function of the
Tire response to inflation-pressure loading. To
applied normal load. Gross footprint area is defined as
assess the accuracy of the high fidelity carcass model of
the total contact area of the tire, and the groove areas are
the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire, profile deformations
included in this parameter. For a smooth tread tire, the
produced by a uniform inflation pressure of 300 psi and
net and gross footprint areas are identical.
acting normal to the interior surface were calculated
using a strip of geometrically nonlinear shell finite Figures 23 and 24 denote experimental data by
elements described above. Figure 21 presents inflated square symbols. Predicted contact areas based upon the
and uninflated cross-sectional profiles for the Space Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation are denoted by cir-
Shuttle nose-gear tire. The primary effect of inflation cular symbols and the dashed linear curve representing a
pressure is to expand the tire profile in the cross-sectional least-squares fairing of the analytical results. Predicted
regions I-V. (See fig. 2.) The predicted inflated profile is contact areas based upon the contact-area algorithm cal-
in excellent agreement with the measured profiles from culations are denoted by triangular symbols and the solid
the photogrammetry studies. Photogrammetry data from linear curve least-squares fairing of the analytical results.
9



=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Resultspresentedin
figures 23 and 24 indicate that along these ridges is between 900 psi and 1000 psi.
contact-area predictions based upon the contact-area Experimental measurements of the normal load-intensity
algorithm are much more accurate than those based upon distribution cannot confirm the existence of these high
the Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation. Predicted net load-intensity ridges since no load transducers were
footprint areas are more accurate than those of the gross located in the critical region along the edge of the center
footprint areas regardless of the calculation method used. groove for this normal load condition. For the remainder
Results presented in figures 23 and 24 also indicate that of the footprint area the predicted magnitudes of normal
additional fine-tuning of the contact-area algorithm is load intensities are slightly less than the measured inten-
needed for improved contact-area predictions, especially sities, and the predicted distribution of normal load inten-
at the higher normal load conditions. sities is generally in fair agreement with experimental
measurements. These results are consistent with analyti-
Figure 25 presents the method of obtaining a predic-
cal results for a tire tread presented in reference 39.
tion of the tire footprint shape from the analytical results.
Figure 25 shows a map of contact nodes, denoted by For the 15 O00-1bf normal load case the analysis pre-
square symbols, in and around the footprint area pro- dicts ridges of high load intensities along each edge of
jected onto the contact surface. Dark symbols represent the three circumferential tread grooves. Magnitudes
nodes that are in contact with the flat surface and light associated with these ridges range between 500 psi and
symbols represent nodes that are not in contact. A solid 800 psi, and are generally lower than the peak load inten-
line denotes the measured footprint outline obtained from sities predicted for the 2000-1bf normal load case. Pre-
the lightweight oil and graphite powder footprint stamps dicted and measured normal load-intensity distributions
described previously in reference 37. A dashed line rep- are in good agreement.
resents an elliptical curve approximation of the footprint
Figure 27 shows comparison of measured and pre-
shape based on the distribution of contact nodes. For the
dicted lateral friction load-intensity distributions. For the
2000-1bf normal load case shown in figure 25(a), mea-
2000-1bf normal load case (fig. 27(a)), both measured
sured and calculated footprint widths are in close agree-
and predicted lateral friction load-intensity distributions
ment, but predicted footprint length is less than the
exhibit loss in skew symmetry across the width of the
measured length. These measured and/or calculated foot-
footprint due to misalignment in the loading fixture.
print shapes are included in figures 26-31 as an aid in
Measured and calculated lateral friction load-intensity
interpreting the footprint load-intensity data. For the
distributions are in good agreement, and the magnitudes
15000-1bf normal load case shown in figure 25(b), mea-
of the measured and predicted lateral friction load inten-
sured and calculated footprint shapes are in close agree-
sities are in fair agreement.
ment. It should be noted that the footprint outline looks
distorted in figure 25(b) due to a difference in scaling For the 15 000-1bf normal load case (fig. 27(b)), both
factors between the two coordinates. predicted and measured lateral friction load intensities
are shown to reach their maximum magnitudes in the lat-
Tire contact load-intensity distributions. Fig- eral extremities of the tire footprint. This trend is more
ures 26-28 present comparisons of measured and pre- apparent for predicted results than for measured values.
dicted tire footprint load-intensity distributions. Data Both predicted lateral friction load intensities and
presented in the form of contour plots and measured measured results exhibit bands of alternating positive and
load-intensity distributions shown in figures 15-17 are negative friction values across the width of the tire
reproduced here to aid in the comparison. Boundary con- footprint.
ditions used to produce the analytical results were chosen
Figure 28 shows comparison of measured and pre-
to simulate the misalignment in the loading fixture
described earlier and arrows in figures 26-28 denote the dicted drag friction load-intensity distributions. For the
direction, but not the magnitude, of tangential displace- 2000-1bf normal load case (fig. 28(a)) predicted drag
ments that occurred during the normal loading sequence friction load intensities are higher than the measured val-
ues. Experimental measurements and analytical predic-
as a result of the misalignment. Part (a) of each figure
presents results from the 2000-1bf normal load case, tions both indicate local maximums in the drag friction
load intensities in the fore and aft sections of the tire
and part (b) of each figure presents results from the
15 000-1bf load case. All analytical results shown in fig- footprint. However, the small negative drag friction load
ures 26-28 were obtained using model 1. intensities seen in the experimental results are not present
in the analytical predictions. Overall, the comparison
For the 2000-1bf normal load case the analysis between measured and predicted drag friction load-
predicts a ridge of high normal load intensities along intensity distributions indicate that analytical predictions
both edges of the center circumferential tread groove. give a reasonable approximation of the drag friction dis-
(See fig. 26(a).) The magnitude of normal load intensities tribution of the tire for static loading conditions, but
10



=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
additionaml odefline-tuningeffortsareneedetdobring
for the loading case considered. Both models predict a
analyticaalndexperimentdarlagfrictionload-intensity
loss in lateral friction load-intensity skew symmetry due
resultsintoclosear greement.
to the unsymmetric loading condition and this lack
Forthe15000-1bnformalol adcase(fig.28(b))b, oth of symmetry is more pronounced for the model 1
predictedandmeasureddragfrictionload-intensidtyis- predictions.
tributionsareshowntoexhibitlocalpositiveandnega-
Figure 29(c) presents calculated drag friction load-
tivemaximumisn theforeandaft sectionosf thetire
intensity distributions for the models. Predicted drag fric-
footprinat ndtoexhibitminimummagnitudensearthe
tion load intensities from model 3 are consistently higher
centerof the footprint.Predicteddragfrictionload-
than those from model 1, and the model 3 drag friction
intensitymagnitudeasregenerallhyigherthanmeasured
load-intensity distribution is more uniform over the tire
values.Theanalysispredictsthe formationof larger
contact region than the predicted drag friction load-
pocketsof negativedragfrictionloadintensitieisn the
intensity distribution from model 1.
leadingedgeofthefootprin(ttherightedgeofthefoot-
printin fig.28(b))thanthemeasuremenintsdicateb,ut In summary, predicted contact load-intensity distri-
thistrendis consistenwtiththeexperimentmaleasure- butions for model I and model 3 are generally in close
mentsobtainedfor the 30000-1bnf ormalloadcase agreement. Model 3 softens the predicted peak normal
showninfigure17(c). load intensities along the edges of the center tread
groove, but predicts larger friction load-intensity magni-
Correlationbetweentheanalyticapl redictionasnd
tudes than model 1. Predicted normal load-intensity
experimentmaleasuremeonfttsirefootprinat rean, ormal
distribution from model 3 is in closer agreement with the
load-intensidtyistributionas,ndtangentialol ad-intensity
experimental measurements (see figs. 15-17 and
distributionasppearstobestrongefror the15000-1bf
figs. 26-28 for examples) than that from model 1, but
normalloadcasethanforthe2000-1blofadcase.
predicted lateral friction and drag friction load-intensity
distributions from model 1 are closer to the experimental
Influence of Model Refinement on Predicted measurements than those from model 3. Both models
Contact Load-Intensity Distributions predict a shorter tire footprint length than the experimen-
tal measurement for the 2000-1bf normal load case.
The contour plots in figure 29 show predicted con-
tact load-intensity distributions for the Space Shuttle
nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of Effect of Tread Grooves and Friction on
300 psi and unsymmetric static loading conditions asso- Predicted Contact Load-Intensity Distributions
ciated with the experimental loading fixture misalign-
Figure 30 presents a comparison of predicted contact
ment. Load-intensity distribution predictions were made
load-intensity distributions for a smooth-tread Space
with model 1 and model 3 (figs. 19 and 20) for the
Shuttle nose-gear tire and a circumferentially-grooved
2000 lbf normal load case. Tangential displacement
tread Space Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to a normal
directions associated with the loading fixture misalign-
load of 2000 lbf. Analysis of both tread configurations
ment are denoted by arrows in figure 29. Calculated con-
was conducted with model 1, and for these results, tire
tact area for each model is denoted by a dashed outline in
normal loading was assumed to be symmetric with no
each contour plot and there is no significant difference
tangential displacements associated with load fixture
between the two calculated footprint shapes. Figure 29(a)
misalignments. Figure 30(a) shows normal load-intensity
shows calculated normal load-intensity distributions. The
distributions. Smooth-tread tire results indicate peak nor-
more refined model 3 and model 1 each predicted the
mal load intensities between 300 psi and 400 psi near the
existence of a ridge of high load intensities along both
center of contact. When the smooth tread is replaced with
edges of the center tread groove for this loading case, but
a circumferentially-grooved tread, two ridges of high
the predicted magnitudes of these load intensities from
normal load intensities are observed along the edges of
model 3 were about 200 psi lower than those predicted
the center groove. Magnitude of normal load intensities
by model 1. This result is consistent with results pre-
along these ridges is between 900 psi and 1000 psi. It
sented in reference 38 for frictionless contact. Overall,
should be noted that normal load-intensity distribution
the predicted normal load-intensity distribution from
for the symmetrically-loaded grooved-tread tire is nearly
model 3 is smoother than the predicted distribution from
identical to the predicted normal load-intensity distribu-
model 1.
tion shown in figure 26(a) for the unsymmetrically
Figure 29(b) presents calculated lateral friction load- loaded tire. The presence of the circumferential tread
intensity distributions for model 1 and model 3. Gener- grooves also affects the predicted footprint shape. The
ally, the predicted lateral friction load-intensity magni- grooved-tread footprint is slightly longer and thinner
tudes from model 3 are larger than those from model 1 than the smooth-tread footprint.
11



=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Figure30(b)showscomparisoonfthelateraflriction
energy density. For the load cases shown, the total strain
load-intensidtyistributionfsorthegrooveda-ndsmooth-
energy density is primarily influenced by the inflation
treadtireandfigure30(c)showsthedragfrictionload-
pressure load. Since the normal loads associated with
intensitydistributioncomparisonL.ateralfrictionload
contact are compressive, the total strain energy density is
intensitiesfor bothtreadconfigurationesxhibitskew
reduced in the region of contact. Total strain energy den-
symmetridcistributionascrostshewidthofthetirefoot-
sity is also reduced in the lower tire sidewall near the
print andthe presenceof the centercircumferential
bead. Transverse-shear strain energy density is maxi-
groovedoesnothavea significanet ffectonthelateral
mized in the tire sidewall near the contact zone and along
frictionload-intensitdyistributionI.nsensitivityof the
the lower sidewall near the bead. In the upper sidewall
lateraflrictionload-intensidtyistributiontothepresence
and shoulder of the tire near the contact region (see
ofacentegr rooveisattributedtothenaturadlistribution
fig. 32(b) insert) the transverse-shear strain energy repre-
oflateraflrictionloadintensitiewshichconcentrattheese
sents about 25 percent to 50 percent of the total strain
frictionforcesin thelaterael xtremitieosfthefootprint.
energy associated with static contact.
Predicteddragfrictionloadintensitiefsorthissymmetric
loadingconditionareuniformlysmallovertheentire
Conclusions
footprinat ndshouldbecomparewdiththepredicteddrag
frictionloadintensitiesfor the unsymmetrilcoading
A computational procedure is presented for the solu-
case(.Seefig.28(a).)
tion of frictional contact problems for aircraft tires. The
Space Shuttle nose-gear tire is modeled using a two-
In summarya, comparisoonf thepredictedload-
intensitydistributionpsresenteidn figure30withthose dimensional laminated anisotropic shell theory with the
presenteind figures26-28indicatesthatpredictednor- effects of variations in material and geometric parame-
malload-intensitdyistributionasrestronglyinfluenced ters, transverse-shear deformation, and geometric non-
linearities included.
by the presenceof treadgroovesandgenerallyun-
affectedby unsymmetrilcoadingconditionasssociated
Experimental results are presented that describe the
withtheloadingfixturemisalignmenCtso. nversellya,t-
response of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire to inflation-
eralfrictionanddragfrictionload-intensidtyistributions
pressure loads and to combined inflation-pressure loads
wereunaffectebdythepresencoeftreadgroovefsorthe
and normal static loads against a rigid fiat plate. These
loadingconditionesxaminedb,utwereverysensitivteo
experimental results describe the meridional growth of
tangentiadlisplacemenatsssociatewdiththemisalign-
the tire cross section due to inflation loading, the static
menitntheloadingfixture.
load-deflection characteristics of the tire, the geometry of
Figure31presentascomparisoonfpredictendormal the tire footprint under static loading conditions, and the
loadintensitiefsorfrictionaal ndfrictionlescsontacotfa normal and tangential load-intensity distributions in the
grooved-treaSdpaceShuttlenose-geatirre.Bothanaly- tire footprint for the various static vertical-loading
conditions.
seswereconductewdithmodel1.Thecomparisopnre-
sentedin figure31 indicatesthatthe normalload-
Numerical results are presented for the Space Shuttle
intensitydistributionforsymmetricstaticloadingcases
nose-gear tire subjected to inflation-pressure loads and
is unaffectedby thepresencoef frictionforces.This
combined inflation-pressure and contact loads against a
resultimpliesthata reasonablmeodelingstrategyfor
rigid fiat plate.
tiressubjectetdostaticloadingcontacctonditionms ight
involveoperatosrplittingtechniquetsofirst applythe
Results from this investigation lead to the following
normalloadwitha frictionlesscontacatssumptioannd observations and conclusions:
thenapplysubsequetnatngentialol adswitha contact-
frictionalgorithm. • The predicted inflated profile is in excellent agree-
ment with measured profiles from the photogram-
metry studies. Predicted normal and tangential
Strain Energy Density Distributions
contact load-intensity distributions are in fair to
One method of showing the regions of high strain good agreement with experimental measurements,
due to the imposed loads on a complex structure such as though additional experimental and analytical stud-
a tire is strain energy density. Calculated variations in the ies are needed. Correlation between analytical pre-
strain energy density for the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire dictions and experimental measurements of tire
are presented in figure 32 in the form of contour plots. footprint area, normal load-intensity distributions,
Results are shown for normal loading cases of 2000 lbf and tangential load-intensity distributions appears
and 15 000 lbf. Figure 32(a) presents total strain energy to be stronger for the 15 000-1bf normal load case
density and figure 32(b) presents transverse-shear strain than for the 2000-1bf load case.
12



=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
2.Predictednormalload-intensitdyistributionfrom
. Normal load-intensity distributions for symmetric
themodewl itharefinedgridinthetirecontacatrea
static loading cases are unaffected by the presence
is incloseragreemewntiththeexperimentmalea-
of friction forces. This result implies that a reason-
surementtshan the distributionfrom the least
able modeling strategy for tires subjected to static-
refinedmodelusedin thisinvestigatiobnu, tpre-
loading contact conditions might involve operator
dictedlateralfriction and dragfriction load-
splitting techniques to first apply the normal
intensitydistributionfsromthatleasrtefinedmodel
load with a frictionless contact assumption and
areclosertotheexperimentmaleasurementhtsan
then apply subsequent tangential loads with a
thosefromtherefinedmodel.
contact-friction algorithm.
3.Predictednormalload-intensitdyistributionasre
, In the upper sidewall and shoulder of the tire near
stronglyinfluencedby the presenceof tread
the contact region the transverse-shear strain
groovesandgenerallyunaffectebdyunsymmetric
energy represents about 25 percent to 50 percent of
loadingconditionasssociatewdiththeloadingfix-
the total strain energy associated with static
turemisalignmenLtsa.teraflrictionanddragfric- contact.
tionload-intensitdyistributionasreunaffectebdy
thepresencoeftreadgroovefsortheloadingcondi-
tionsexaminedb,utareverysensitivteotangential
NASA Langley Research Center
displacemenatsssociatewdiththemisalignmenint
Hampton, VA23681-0001
theloadingfixture.
February 6, 1996
13



=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Appendix
Fundamental Equations of Shell Theory Used in Present Study
This appendix summarizes the fundamental equations of the Sanders-Budiansky type shell of revolution used in this
study. Effects of laminated, anisotropic material response and transverse-shear deformation are included in these
relationships.
Strain-Displacement Relationships
w
(A1)
es :
%=-7-a.+sr_ a0v+ +w l(-_2 - _a0wJ2 1 2 (A2)
2ese !aoU / asr _ u v (A3)
Ks = as¢s (A4)
_o = a -- s r r_ s+ _ao_o (A5)
(A6)
U
2_s3 = - RI + asW + _s (A7)
2E03 = -R2+ aoW+_o (A8)
where es and g0 are extensional strains in the meridional and circumferential directions, 2CsO is the in-plane shear
strain, _cs and 1<0are bending strains in the meridional_aand circumferential directions, 2_sO is the twisting strain, 2es3
and 2e03 are transverse-shear strains, as -- _-, a 0 - _--_,and _ is the rotation around the normal to the shell, which is
vV
given by _S
¢P= L!aeU+Ias+_--Srr-lvl (A9)
Nonlinear terms that account for moderate rotations are underlined with dashes in equations (A 1) -(A3).
Constitutive Relations
The shell is assumed to be made of a laminated, anisotropic, linearly elastic material. Every point of the shell is
assumed to possess a single plane of elastic symmetry parallel to the middle surface. The relationships between the
stress resultants and the strain measures of the shell are given by
14



=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
N S ell c,2 @ fll f12 (_ • • E s
N o c22 f12 f22 (_) • • £0
Nso c66 _ _ f66 • • 213s0
............................
M
s dll d12 (_ • • 1¢s
(AIO)
M o d22 (_ • • 1¢0
Mso Symmetric d66 • • 2_¢s0
as
c55 c@ 2Cs3
Oo c44 2E03
where cij, fij, and dij (i,j = 1, 2, 6) are shell stiffness coefficients. Nonorthotropic (anisotropic) terms are circled and dots
indicate zero terms.
15



=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
References 17. Noor, Ahmed K.; Andersen, Carl M.; and Tanner, John A.:
Exploiting Symmetries in the Modeling and Analysis of 7ires.
1. Zhong, Zhi-Hua; and Mackerle, Jaroslav: Static Contact Prob- NASA TP-2649, 1987.
lems_A Review. Eng. Comput., vol. 9, Feb. 1992, pp. 3-37.
18. Noor, Armed K.; and Tanner, John A.: Advances in Contact
2. Tanner, J. A.: Static and Yawed-Rolling Mechanical Properties
Algorithms and Their Application to Tires. NASA TP-2781,
of Two Type Vll Aircrafi Tires. NASA TP-1863, 1981. 1988.
3. Stubbs, Sandy M.; Tanner, John A.; and Smith, Eunice G.:
19. Sanders, J. L., Jr.: Nonlinear Theories for Thin Shells. Q. Appl.
Behavior of Aircraft Antiskid Braking Systems on Dry and Wet
Math., vol. 21, no. I, Apr. 1963, pp. 21-36.
Runway Surfaces---A Slip-Velocity-Controlled, Pressure-Bias-
Modulated System. NASA TP-1051, 1978. 20. Budiansky, Bernard: Notes on Nonlinear Shell Theory.
J. Appl. Mech., vol. 35, no. 2, June 1968, pp. 393-401.
4. Tanner, John A.; Dreher, Robert C.; Stubbs, Sandy M.; and
Smith, Eunice G.: 7ire Tread Temperatures During Antiskid 21. Simo, Juan C.; Wriggers, Peter; and Taylor, Robert L.: A Per-
Braking and Cornering on a Dry Runway. NASA TP-2009, turbed Lagrangian Formulation for the Finite Element Solu-
1982. tion of Contact Problems. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. &
Eng., vol. 50, no. 2, Aug. 1985, pp. 163-180.
5. Daugherty, Robert H.; and Stubbs, Sandy M.: Cornering and
Wear Behavior of the Space Shuttle Orbiter Main Gear 7ire. 22. Stein, E.; Wagner, W.; and Wriggers, P.: Finite Element Post-
SAE Paper 871867, Oct. 1987. buckling Analysis of Shells With Nonlinear Contact
Restraints. Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear Problems.
6. Daugherty, Robert H.; and Stubbs, Sandy M.: Spin-Up Studies
P. G. Bergan, K. J. Bathe, and W. Wunderlich, eds., Springer-
of the Space Shuttle Orbiter Main Gear 7ire. SAE Paper
Verlag, 1986, pp. 719-744.
881360, Oct. 1988.
23. Wriggers, Peter; and Nour-Omid, Bahram: Solution Methods
7. Oden, J. T.; and Martins, J. A. C.: Models and Computational
for Contact Problems. Rep. No. UCB/SESM-84/09 (Contract
Methods for Dynamic Friction Phenomena. Comput. Meth-
N00014-76-C-0013), Dep. of Civil Engineering, Univ. of
ods Appl. Mech. & Eng., voi. 52, nos. 1-3, Sept. 1985,
California, July 1984.
pp. 527_534.
24. Concus, Paul; Golub, Gene H.; and O'Leary, Dianne P.: A
8. Clark, Samuel K.; and Dodge, Richard N.: Heat Generation in
Generalized Conjugate Gradient Method for the Numerical
Aircraft Tires Under Free Rolling Conditions. NASA
CR-3629, 1982. Solution of Elliptic Partial Differential Equations. Sparse
Matrix Computations. James R. Bunch and Donald J. Rose,
9. Clark, Samuel K.; and Dodge, Richard N.: Heat Generation in eds., Academic Press Inc., 1976, pp. 309-332.
Aircraft Tires Under Braked Rolling Conditions. NASA
CR-3768, 1984. 25. Adams, Loyce: M-Step Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
Methods. SlAM J. Sci. & Stat. Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, Apr.
10. McCarty, John L.: Temperature Distribution in an Aircraft Tire 1985, pp. 452-463.
at Low Ground Speeds. NASA TP-2195, 1983.
26. Tanner, J. A.; Martinson, V. J.; and Robinson, M. P.: Static
11. Schaeffer, H. G.; and Ball, R. E.: Nonlinear Deflections of Frictional Contact of the Space Shuttle Nose Gear Tire.
Asymmetrically Loaded Shells of Revolution. AIAA-68-292, Tire Sci. & Tech., TSTCA, vol. 22, no. 4, Oct.-Dec. 1994,
Apr. 1968. pp. 242-272.
12. Wunderlich, W.; Cramer, H.; and Obrecht, H.: Application of 27. Tanner, John A.: Computational Methods for Frictional Con-
Ring Elements in the Nonlinear Analysis of Shells of Revolu- tact With Applications to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Nose-Gear
tion Under Nonaxisymmetric Loading. Comput. Methods 7ire--Development of Frictional Contact Algorithm. NASA
Appl. Mech. & Eng., vol. 51, Sept. 1985, pp. 259-275. TP-3574, 1996.
13. Noor, A. K.: On Making Large Nonlinear Problems Small. 28. User's Manual--ISML Math(cid:0)Library, Version 1.1, MALB-
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. & Eng., vol. 34, nos. 1-3, Sept. USM-PERFCT-EN8901-1.1, IMSL, Inc., Jan. 1989.
1982, pp. 955-985.
29. Cline, Alan Kaylor: Fitpack A Software Package for Curve
14. Noor, Ahmed K.; Andersen, Carl M.; and Tanner, John A.:
and Surface Fitting Employing Splines Under Tension.
Mixed Models and Reduction Techniques for Large-Rotation,
Pleasant Valley Software, 1985.
Nonlinear Analysis of Shells of Revolution With Application to
Tires. NASA TP-2343, 1984. 30. De Boor, Carl: A Practical Guide to Splines. Springer-Verlag,
1978.
15. Noor, Ahmed K.: Reduction Method for the Non-Linear Anal-
ysis of Symmetric Anisotropic Panels. Int. J. Numer. Methods 31. Reinsch, Christian H.: Smoothing by Spline Functions. Numer.
Eng., vol. 23, July 1986, pp. 1329-1341. Math., vol. 10, no. 3, 1967, pp. 177-183.
16. Noor, Ahmed K.; and Peters, Jeanne M.: Nonlinear Analy- 32. Cline, A. K.: Scalar- and Planar-Valued Curve Fitting Using
sis of Anisotropic Panels. AIAA J., vol. 24, Sept. 1986, Splines Under Tension. Commun. ACM, vol. 17, no. 4, Apr.
pp. 1545-1553. 1974, pp. 218-220.
16



=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
33.JonesR, obertM.:
Mechanics of Composite Materials. Field Testing of the 15-Meter Hoop-Column Antenna. NASA
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1975. TM-4073, 1989.
34. Walter, J. D.: Cord Reinforced Rubber. Mechanics of Pneu- 37. Howell, William E.; Tanner, Sharon E.; and Vogler, William
matic 7ires, Samuel K. Clark, ed., U.S. Dep. of Transportation, A.: Static Footprint Local Forces, Areas, and Aspect Ratios for
1981, pp. 123-202. Three Type VII Aircraft Tires. NASA TP-2983, 1991.
38. Kim, Kyun O.; Noor, Ahmed K.; and Tanner, John A.: Model-
35. Karara, H. M., ed.: Non-Topographic Photogrammetry, Sec-
ing and Analysis of the Space Shuttle Nose-Gear Tire With
ond ed. American Soc. for Photogrammetry and Remote Sens-
Semianalytic Finite Elements. NASA TP-2977, 1990.
ing, 1989.
39. Gall, R.; Tkacik, P.; and Andrews, M.: On the Incorporation of
36. Schroeder, Lyle C.; Adams, Richard C.; Bailey, M. C.; Belvin, Frictional Effects in the Tire/Ground Contact Area. 17re Sci.
W. Keith; Butler, David H.; and Campbell, Thomas G.: Near- and Tech., vol. 21, no. 1, Jan.-Mar. 1993, pp. 2-22.
17



=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Table 1. Variation of Ply Thickness hk/h 0
[ho = 0.7513 in.]
hklh 0 for region--
Ply number
(top to bottom) II HI IV V VI VII
16
1
h = h-Zh k
(tread and sidewall)
k=2
a2 0.0865- 0.0865- 0.0658- 0.0692- 0.0801- 0.0681- 0.0918-
.0865 .0658 .0692 .0813 .0937 .1238 .1240
3 0.0865- 0.0865- 0.0658- 0.0692- 0.0801- 0.0681- 0.0918-
.0865 .0658 .0692 .0813 .0937 .1238 .1240
0.0865- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0692- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0865 .0506 .0532 .0813 .0571 .0950 .0880
0.0666- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0666 .0506 .0532 .0500 .0571 .0950 .0880
0.0666- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- b0.2662-
.0666 .0506 .0532 .0500 .0571 .0950 .3594
0.0666- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0666 .0506 .0532 .0500 .0571 .0950 .0880
0.0666- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0666 .0506 .0532 .0500 .0571 .0950 .0880
0.0666- 0.0666- 0.0506- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0666 .0506 .0532 .0500 .0571 .0950 .0880
10 0.0666- 0.0466- 0.0354- 0.0426- 0.0488- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0666 .0354 .0373 .0500 .0571 .0950 .0880
11 0.0466- 0.0466- 0.0354- 0.0346- 0.0488- 0.0523- b0.2662-
.0466 .0354 .0373 .0407 .0571 .0950 .3594
12 0.0466- 0.0798- 0.0798- 0.0346- 0.0375- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0466 .0798 .0798 .0407 .0439 .0950 .0880
13 0.0798-- 0 0.0798- 0.0375-- 0.0523- 0.0652-
.0798 .0798 .0439 .0950 .0880
14 0 0 0 0.0798- 0.0366-- 0.0466-
.0798 .0666 .0629
15 0 0 0 0.0366- 0.0466-
.0666 .0629
16 0 0 0 0 0 0.0798- 0.1464--
.1464 .1597
aSecond layer of region I represents layer which has reinforcement (see fig. 2).
bRepresents thickness of bead wires.
18



=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Table2. ValuesofElasticConstanotsfTireConstituenUtssedinPresenSttudy
Tireconstituent Young'smodulusp,si Sheamr odulusp,si Poisson'rsatio
Rubber 4.5x 102 1.51x 102 0.49
Nyloncord 3.5x 105 7.00x 102 .66
Beaad 2.9x 107 1.10x 107 .30
aSince deformations are small in bead area, itis reasonable to assume that bead wires are isotropic.
Table 3. Variation of Nylon Cord End Counts in Different Plies Along Meridian
Cord end count, ends per inch, for region--
Ply number
(top to bottom) I II III IV V VI VII
1 Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber
(tread and sidewall)
2 16-16 18-14 14-14 14-14 14-14 14-14 14-14
3 18-18 18-14 14-14 14-14 14-14 14-14 14-14
4 18-18 21-20 20-18 18-16 16-16 16-14 14-14
5 23-21 21-20 20-18 18-16 16-16 16-14 14-14
6 23-21 21-20 20-18 18-16 16-16 16-14 Bead
7-9 23-21 21-20 20-18 18-16 16-16 16-14 14-14
10 23-21 29-26 26-25 18-16 16-16 16-14 14-14
11 30-29 29-26 26-25 25-24 16-16 16-14 Bead
12 30-29 Rubber Rubber 25-24 24-22 16-14 14-14
13 Rubber Rubber 24-22 16-14 14-14
14 Rubber 22-22 22-22
15 22-22 22-22
16 Rubber Rubber
19



=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Table4. VariationofCordOrientatioonfIndividuaPl lies,6k,AlongMeridian
6
k , deg, for region--
Ply number
(top to bottom) I II III IV V V! VII
1 Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber Rubber
2 -6-6 6 6 6 6 6 6
3 6 -6 -6 -6 -6 -6 -6
4 -6 6 -6 -6 -6
5 6 -6 -6 6 6 -6
6 -6 6 6 -6 6 -6 Bead
7 6 -6 -6 -6 -6
8 -6 6 6 -6 6 -6 6
9 6 -6 -6 6 -6 6 -6
10 -6 6+6 6+6 -6 -6 6
11 6+6 -6-6 -6-6 6+6 -6 Bead
12 -6-6 Rubber Rubber -6-6 6+6 6
13 Rubber Rubber -6-6 -6 -6
14 Rubber 6+6 6+6
15 -6-6 -6-6
16 Rubber Rubber
2O



=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
Z
I
I
ItI
b1= 15.1734 in.
b2 = 4.12 in.
At Q At®
s=_ =o s = 9.76 in.
_=o.5
ho = 0.75 in.
r=b I
I
I
I
I
bI '1
Boundary conditions:
At _ = 0.5 At _ = 0
u = v = w = 0 Symmetry condition:
_ = _o=0 u =v =_s=% =0
Figure 1. Geometric characteristics of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
21



=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
Nylon cords
0.1102
h=l
.... .2562
=.696 .... .3176
_= .785
..... .3535
h= .974
--.3843
= 1.587
Wire beads
VII .4483
= 2.185
Figure 2. Cross section of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire showing seven model regions.
22



=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
1.5 m
1.0
....
.5
Normalized
0
parameter
-.5 "'"',, Or
-, c_s
-1.0
W I I I I
-1.5
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5
K1/KI,o
-5
-10
I I I I I
-15
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Figure 3. Meridional variation of geometric parameters of two-dimensional shell model of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
Reference surface chosen to be outer surface, r0 = 15.1737 in., _:2,o = 0.0659 in -1- K1,o 0.1091 in -1.
23



=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
20 x 103
0 fll _----,,
-- ell , C2_,/-']
__
32
C..
IJ
EToh ° 24
16
f12 ""
f66 -12 x 103
I [ [ fill -24 × 103
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
I
_=0
32 × 103 6 x 103
-- dll, d22//_
/ __-_4x 103
24
__ ddj_2-_L J 16 x 103
.20
d.. C.. I
-- tj .15 J
'ETo_ho18 EToho -__. C5 5
12 '-" d I .10
"'. _..2 dll/_ _
.05
I I I I
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
(a) Stiffness coefficients associated with uncoupled (orthotropic) response.
Figure 4. Meridional variation of stiffness coefficients of two-dimensional shell model of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
Ezo = 1160.3 psi; h0 = 0.7513 in.
24



=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
o__1,,,, 1.00
I .75
-.5 -- c26 j I !
i
i
!
.50
C aj . -1.0 C16 f aj . ---_"f_"-..., ,
ET0h0 F--_0h02 .25 - f,6 "'" !'/
-1.5
-2.0 I I I I I I I I I I
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 •1 .2 .3 .4 .5
I
_-0_
0 x 103
.25 --
-.5 m
-.25 ''"-/J "" -1.0 -
d .
C45
E_ohO_
EToho -1.5 -
I
i/I d26 ____J
-.75 /
-2.0 --
-.50
-i.oo I I I I I -2.5 I I I I I
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
(b) Coupling (nonorthotropic) stiffness coefficients, a = 1,2.
Figure 4. Concluded.
25



=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
z
x
I
Figure 5. Arrangement of photogrammetry targets on Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
/
s
- - -J....... L.........
Loaded profile _ Unloaded profile
Figure 6. Unloaded and loaded sidewall profiles for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
26



=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
- S
30
I I
25
II I/I
20
Vertical
load, 15
kips
10
_1_1 i/ I _ 'ncreasin_ load
5 __ ,_/0 / .lff i .... --D Decreasing load
Jr"" I ' I I
0 ! 2 3
Deflection, w, in.
Figure 7. Static vertical load-deflection curve for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
16_-
14
12
10
Footprint
length, 8
in.
6
4
\_Length = 3.398 + 7.873 × 10-4 (Fz) - 2.408 × 10-8 (F2) + 3.404 × 1013 (F_)
I 1 I I
0 10 20 30 40 x 103
Vertical load, lbf
Figure 8. Footprint length as a function of vertical load for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300 psi.
27



=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
©
Footprint
width,
in.
Width = 1.28 + 4.959 × 10.4 (Fz) - 1.675 × 10.8 (F2) + 2.436 × 10-13 (F3 )
I I I I
0 10 20 30 40 x 103
Vertical load, Ibf
Figure 9. Footprint width as a function of vertical load for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300 psi.
8 -
7
6
5
Footprint
width, 4
in.
3
2
1
I
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Footprint length, in.
Figure 10. Footprint width as a function of footprint length for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300 psi.
28



=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
100 Gross area _ / /
Net area
60
Footprint
area,
in2 Gross area= 3.672 + 3.177 × 10-3 FZ
40
Net area = 1.491 + 2.802 x 10-3 Fz
20
I I I I
0 10 20 30 40 × 103
Vertical load, Fz, lbf
Figure 11. Footprint area as a function of vertical load for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300 psi.
1.0 Ratio = 0.805 + 2.17 x 10.6 Fz -"-7
.6
Footprint
area
ratio
.4
.2
I I I I
0 10 20 30 40 × 103
Vertical load, Fz, lbf
Figure 12. Footprint area ratio as a function of vertical load for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300psi.
29



=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
-.23 I
(a) Vertical load = 2000 lbf.
Figure 13. Footprint area and map of tire footprint-force transducer locations for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
30



=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
I:
-_°
q
13 12'_
,18 -10
/
/ .22_0
/-¸22"- .0_ _".20
m
I
m I
4.
m I
n
m
i I
,L
m
m m
i I I
4,
I I i
i i
m i i
m
-.25"..211
/ -.08
m / -.03
.O6 -18
-.2o._____
I
I
"-.-.3j1"2.
10
.i16 35%
(b) Vertical load = 15000 lbf.
Figure 13. Continued.
31



=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
52%
(c) Vertical load = 30000 Ibf.
Figure 13. Concluded.
32



=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
Left half of footprint reflected Left half of footprint rotated
onto right half of footprint onto right half of footprint
I "
iI
/////
(a) Vertical load = 2000 lbf.
Figure 14. Symmetries exhibited by footprint of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
33



=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
Left half of footprint reflected Left half of footprint rotated
onto right half of footprint onto right half of footprint
t
t
I
/,I I t J
tI
(b) Vertical load = 15000 Ibf.
Figure 14. Continued.
34



=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
Left half of footprint reflected Left half of footprint rotated
onto right half of footprint onto right half of footprint
\
(C) Vertical load = 30000 lbf.
Figure 14. Concluded.
35



=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
Tangential displacement directions Normal load intensity, psi
800
700
600
500
d footprint area
400
Footprint
widthin, . 0
300
200
-2
I I I I I I I
-g -2 0 2 4 100
Footprint length, in.
0
(a) Normal load, 2000 Ibf.
Footprint
width, in. 0
-4
I I I I I I I
-8 -4 0 4 8
Footprint length, in.
(b) Normal load, 15000 lbf.
4
i i i i I i i
-4 0 4 8
Footprint length, in.
(c) Normal load, 30000 lbf.
Figure 15. Color contour plot of measured footprint normal load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle orbiter nose-
gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi.
36



=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
Tangentdiaislplacemdeirnetctions
Lateral friction load intensity, psi
48
42
36
30
____ Measured footprint area 24
18
12
Footprint 6
widthin, . O
-6
-12
-18
-24
-2 -30
-4 I I I I I I I -36
-2 0 2 4 -42
Footprint length, in. -48
(a) Lateral friction load intensity for a normal load of 2000 lbf.
Lateral friction load intensity, psi
120
105
90
4
75
60
45
30
15
Footprint 0 0
width, in.
-15
-30
-45
-60
-75
-4
I I [ I I T I I -90
-8 -4 0 4 8 -105
Footprint length, in. -120
(b) Lateral friction load intensity for a normal load of 15000 lbf.
Lateral friction load intensity, psi
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
E-" i i!!iiii!ii_iiii_ii__ii_!__!,i_ii!i!i!_ 25
Footprint
width, in. 0
-25
-50
-75
-100
-4 -125
I I I f [ I I I -150
-8 -4 0 4 8 -175
Footprint length, in. -200
(c) Lateral friction load intensity for a normal load of 30000 lbf.
Figure 16. Color contour plot of measured footprint lateral load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle orbiter nose-
gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi.
37



=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
Tangential displacement directions
v
Drag friction load intensity, psi
4O
35
30
2
25
20
15
ed footprint area 10
5
Footprint 0 0
width, in.
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-2
I I I I I I r I -30
-4 -2 0 2 4 -35
Footprint length, in. -40
(a) Drag friction load intensity for a normal load of 2000 lbf.
Drag friction load intensity, psi
96
84
72
60
48
36
24
12
Footprint 0 0
width, in.
-12
-24
-36
-48
-60
-4
I 1 f I I I I I -72
-8 -4 0 4 8 -84
Footprint length, in. -96
(b) Drag friction load intensity for a normal load of 15 000 lbf.
Drag friction load intensity, psi
96
84
72
60
48
36
24
12
Footprint 0 0
width, in.
-12
-24
-36
i -48
-60
-4 I I I F l I I I -72
-8 -4 0 4 8 -84
Footprint length, in. -96
(C) Drag friction load intensity for a normal load of 30000 lbf.
Figure 17. Color contour plot of measured footprint drag load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle orbiter nose-gear
tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi.
38



=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
-- Groovneodes
4
Nodueseidnmode(tlypical)
_ Pmoosdserieblnflioendefemorent
(typical)
z,in. 0
1 2 3
y,in.
-1
-2
-3
-4
Figure18.MeridionaplrofileofSpaceShuttlenose-geatirremodelsdenotinngodepointlocations.
39



=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
=[(157-81252)+1]'5=1635
0 1 168 339 504 680
t_
641 i i /z ir:i'l'I'vi "/ ir'r'.:J i]" • "t" tit [M:.'_.v.il-rzt_'tir:i:i:i'i_'r: 680
561 :"r-r'r:ir!r!:!rJ'_ 7"::: .t iJ" • • /" _ "-'-,_"_'i'i'l'_"r'r'r'r'r-l_'r_'i: 600
481 ............................ j _ D _ _'_'{:t_'l'i'i'i'r'r'r'r'r_'i_'i:l'_i: '520
4Ol i 7i7iii7i7i7i7i:/ 7i7i7tlfi f i t: t ....... [ :lilii:lilifilrl:t_'rri:I:l:
440
321 : / 7l:t't't:t:tki:t:t:t:t'l [t:t:t:.':' t_ ....... t_:l'Iil:i:i_'"':i:i:i:l'i'l: 360
241 :/" 7t:[:t:t:t:,/':t:t:t:t:t:i _t't't't:rt :TTT'r:i_ll:i'i'i'i'_i';:i'r'i:T:l:l'_i: 280
161 :!' 'i.i.l;l;l:7 .l,i.i.l; ;I !f:f7t7fi_t .:.::::lilt{f{t7tit7l{f7t:f.[.t:t:t71: 20o
8_ ;;i;i;i;i;i;i;i;, .... ; .... {{ t ....... tt ................ 12o
1 ,;,,;i;i;t;i;i;i;i;i;i:i:i;.; i; t ....... tS:i:i:i_'i:r:ielel_'r_'i:iei;': 40
41 ............................ Ii ........ _ ....... t_ ................. 80
121 '!l'l'l'l_'i_l_'l_ .7.,......I...I.... r'i" l. t ....... ttll_'!:!;!:!:!'!_'i:ier:r:r:l'r" 16o
201 "'-77373777-''-7 :/ ;l.t.l.i;-;l I'.._':';:':7"t "_.''_''37i_'l'i'i'i'r'l'_l';I_'i_'I:iTlTr" 240
281 .............. k ........... i!..' ....... t ...... tin7 iii'_T:T 7r_"I_'i:':r:i'i'T'r: 320
ii;i;i;i;i;'?}iTiiiTiTiT:7I
361 V..:::::..t 71"17.'tl:i:l'_l:l'l:t:l:i'r-r'r:l:r" 400
521 'il:I:l:l:lY":I:l:l'i'i'l" /'q _,:'i:l'l'l_ " "_"t_: .......................... 560
fw. 7i}iiiTiTi, iiiiiiTi{i{iTi{
6Ol ::t:t7t7t:7/.. :t:t:t "i:l: >' :!t_{':titit:lt " >/" 64o
681 "'''7'7"71i7 ..... • ..... " /" :ill,'';';'''_ V/. " i_'I:I:i.17,X .l:l-!'-i-iTl;-,{ 720
Groove
129 296 465 633 720
Figure 19. Typical array of finite elements and nodes used to model Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
4O



=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
i
I
Displacement nodes Stress-resultant nodes
M9-4 finite element
Sector Number of elements (M9-4) for--
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
-0.2n < 0 _<0.2n 240 (40 x 6) 480 (40 x 12) 960 (40 x 24)
0<-0.2x, 0 > 0.2_ 480 (40 x 12) 480 (40 x 12) 480 (40 x 12)
Total 720 (40 x 18) 960 (30 x 24) 1440 (40 x 36)
Figure 20. Finite-element models of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire used in present study.
Internal inflation loading,
300 psi
Analysis
Uninflated
..... Inflated
Experiment
/
,¢
s"
Figure 21. Inflated and uninflated profiles of Space Shuttle nose-gear tire.
41



=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
[] Experimental measurement
/_ Contact area algorithm calculation
O Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation
4O 000
3O 000
Tire normal
load, lbf 20 000
O
10000
L I I I
0 .5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Tire normal deflection, in.
Figure 22. Comparison of calculated and measured normal load-deflection curve for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Infla-
tion pressure = 300 psi.
42



=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
[] Experimental measurement
'A Contact area algorithm calculation
-0 Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation
100
90
i/I
80
70
60
Net footprint
area, in2 50
40 /-
30
20
10
I I 1
0 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000
Tire normal load, lbf
Figure 23. Comparison of calculated and measured net tire footprint areas for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation
pressure = 300 psi.
43



=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
[] Experimental measurement
-A Contact area algorithm calculation
"O Newton-Cotes quadrature calculation
100
/
I
90 /
!
/
80 !
!
!
70 /
!
!
60
Gross footprint
50
area, in2
40
30
20
10
I I t I
10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000
Tire normal load, lbf
Figure 24. Comparison of calculated and measured gross tire footprint areas for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation
pressure = 300 psi.
44



=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
- Measured footprint _ Node out of contact (typical)
f . / /_Node in contact (typical)
I m
_ Calculated footpnnt
Footprint 0 --
width, in.
\ • •
F
-2 l J I I I I I I
-L -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Footprint length, in.
(a) Normal load = 2000 lbf.
_ Measured footprint
/.,,,,_.__. _S N°de in c°ntact (typical)
--'_--! ! i i _'_-_ i /--- N°de °ut °f c°ntact (typical)
Footprint
width, in. O n
: ." ..- _-
._ . _. . .
._ . .
=.c - : =. " m -
-2 m
.... Calculated footprint
-4 I I I I I I I I
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8
Footprint length, in.
(b) Normal load = 15000 lbf.
Figure 25. Measured and calculated footprints for Space Shuttle nose-gear tire. Inflation pressure = 300 psi; analytical
results from model 1.
45



=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
Normal load
Tangential displacement directions
intensity, psi
y
1000
900
Experimental measurement Analytical prediction
800
700
600
Footprint 500
widthin, .
400
300
-2
I r I I I 1 I I I 200
_z -2 0 2 -2 0 2
100
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
0
(a) Normal load = 2000 lbf.
__._ _ Calculated
?..otpfin/area
s' x
Footprint
width, in. 0
-4 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ r _ _ _
-8 -4 0 4 8 -8 -4 0 4 8
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(b) Normal load = 15000 tbf.
Figure 26. Comparison of measured and predicted footprint normal load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle
nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi. For model l: Idstatic = 0.6; hi.dynamic = 0.51; en = 1.0E+12;
et = 2.0E+03; Erela x = 0.5.
46



=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Tangential displacement directions
Lateral friction
load intensity, psi
48
42
Experimental measurement Analytical prediction 36
30
24
18
12
6
0
-6
-12
Footprint 0 -18
width, in. -24
-30
-36
-42
-2
I I I I I I I I [ I I I I
-Z -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(a) Lateral friction load intensity for a normal load of 2000 lbf.
Lateral friction
load intensity, psi
120
105
90
75
60
footprint area _ Calculated 45
-_ Measured footprint area 30
15
O
-15
-30
Footprint ..... _ i__ii_i_ _i_ ¸- .... I _15
width, in. 0
I j -60
.................................. _:_i7ii_i -75
-90
_. / ] ]i _,_ "_ -105
-120
-4 T I I I i I _ I I I l I I I l I
-8 -4 0 4 8 -8 -4 0 4 8
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(b) Lateral friction load intensity for a normal load of 15000 lbf.
Figure 27. Comparison of measured and predicted footprint lateral friction load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle
nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi. For model 1: btstatic = 0.6; Iddynamic = 0.51; £n = 1.0E+ 12;
E1-- 2.0E+03; Erela x = 0.5.
47



=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
Tangential displacement directions
Drag friction
load intensity, psi
40
35
Experimental measurement Analytical prediction 30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
Footprint -15
width, in. 0 -20
-25
-30
-35
-2 -4 I -2 I I 0 I I 2 I I 4 I -4 t -2 1 I 0 I I 2 I I 4 I
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(a) Drag friction load intensity for a normal load of 2000 lbf.
Drag friction
load intensity, psi
96
84
72
60
48
Measured footprint area 36
-- Calculated 24
12
area 0
-12
-24
Footprint -36
width, in. 0 -48
_!i}S_iUili3? _ qViii!ii3iiii!J -60
-72
-84
-96
-4
I I I I I 1 I t I I 1 I I I
-8 -4 0 4 8 -8 -4 0 4 8
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(b) Drag friction load intensity for a normal load of 15 000 lbf.
Figure 28. Comparison of measured and predicted footprint drag friction load-intensity distribution for Space Shuttle
nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi. For model 1: ktstatic = 0.6; _tdynami c = 0.51; £n = 1.0E+12;
et = 2.0E+03; Erela x = 0.5.
48



=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
Tangential displacement directions
Load
intensity, psi
1000
Model 1 Model 3 with refined grid in contact zone
900
800
700
600
/ /
Footprint -m .... __- 500
width, in. 400
300
20O
100
-2 I i i I I I I I I I I I I 0
-4 -2 0 2 4 -4 0 2
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(a) Normal load = 2000 lbf.
Load
intensity, psi
48
42
Calculated 36
30
_ footprint area
24
18
j _
/ 12
Footprint 6
width, in. 0
-6
-12
-18
-24
-2 -30
I I -36
-L -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 -42
48
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(b) Lateral friction load intensity, normal load = 2000 lbf.
Load
intensity, psi
40
35
2 30
25
20
15
10
Footprint 5
width, in. 0 0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-2 -25
I I I I I [ [ I I I I I I I r i -30
-4 -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 -35
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(c) Drag friction load intensity, normal load = 2000 lbf.
Figure 29. Effect of contact-area grid refinement on predicted contact load-intensity distributions. Space Shuttle
nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi and unsymmetric static loading conditions. For model 1:
_static = 0.6; _dynamic = 0.51; En = 1.0E+12; at = 2.0E+03; Erela x = 0.5.
49



=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
Load
intensity, psi
1000
Circumferentially grooved tread tire Smooth tread tire 900
800
700
600
Footprint 500
widthin, .O 400
-"_,7"-'-.- 7 t:r77
300
_, .... _i¸¸¸ ,,, 200
100
-2 0
-4 I I I I T I I I I I I
-2 0 4 -4 -2 0
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(a) Normal load = 2000 lbf.
Load
intensity, psi
48
42
36
2 Calculated 30
footprint area 24
18
i • 12
6
Footprint 0
width, in. 0 I !
" / -6
/ -12
-18
-24
-30
-2 i -36
I I I I I I I I I I I I I
-4 -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 -42
-48
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(b) Lateral friction load intensity, normal load = 2000 lbf.
Load
intensity, psi
40
35
30
25
20
15
I • 10
5
Footprint 0
width, in. 0 I I -5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-2 i -30
I -2 i , I 0 I ! 2 I 4 I -4 I -2 I I | 0 I 2 i 4 -35
-Z
-40
Footprint length, in. Footprint length, in.
(c) Drag friction load intensity, normal load = 2000 lbf.
Figure 30. Comparison of circumferentially-grooved tread tire and smooth-tread tire contact load intensities. Space
Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi and symmetric static loading conditions. For
model 1: btstatic = 0.6; [.tdynami c = 0.51; En = 1.OE+12; Et = 2.0E+03; Erelax = 0.5.
5O



=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
Frictional contact
Normal load intensity, psi
2 m 1000
Calculated footprint area
__ 900
800
I x
Footprint
width, in. 0 - ..... .---------------- 700
x /
600
500
-2 I I I 400
-4 -2 0 2
300
Footprint length, in.
200
100
Frictionless contact
2 - 0
Calculated footprint area
,d '_'_ -,- ,_ /m
Footprint
width, in,
J
-2 I I I
-4 -2 0 2 4
Footprint length, in.
Figure 31. Comparison of normal load intensities from frictional and frictionless contact. Space Shuttle nose-gear
tire subjected to an inflation pressure of 300 psi and symmetric static loading conditions. For model 1:/U.static -- 0.6;
_dynamic = 0.51; En = i.0E+12; et = 2.0E+03; F_,relax = 0.5.
51



=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
Normal load = 2000 lbf Normal load = 15 000 lbf
Total strain energy density,
in-lb
90
80
70
60
50
0
40
30
20
10
0
-.5 -.25 0 .25 .5
S
(a) Total strain energy density.
Transverse-shear strain energy density,
in-ib
27
24
21
18
15
0 i'i,
0 -
12
ililiiiiiiil]
9
6
Detail
3
0
ii
[ r ] I
-.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5
S S
(b) Transverse-shear strain energy density.
Figure 32. Variation of calculated strain energy density distribution. Space Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to an
inflation pressure of 300 psi and symmetric static loading conditions. For model 1: _tstatic = 0.6; Iddynamic = 0.51;
en = 1.0E+12; _t = 2.0E+03; Erela x = 0.5.
52



=== PDF PAGE 59 ===




=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMBNo0.704-0188
Pubtic reporting burden forthis coUecti(>nof information isestimated to average 1 hourper response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and coml_eting and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202J.30_, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduclion Proiest (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
May 1996 Technical Paper
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING NUMBERS
Computational Methods for Frictional Contact With Applications to the
Space Shuttle Orbiter Nose-Gear Tire WU 505-63-50-19
Comparisons of Experimental Measurements and Analytical Predictions
6. AUTHOR(S)
John A. Tanner
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER
NASA Langley Research Center L-17211A
Hampton, VA 23681-0001
9. SPONSORING/MONITORIANGGENCYNAME(S)ANDADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA TP-3573
Washington, DC 20546-0001
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
1211. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
Unclassified-Unlimited
Subject Category 39
Availability: NASA CASI (301) 621-0390
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
A computational procedure is presented for the solution of frictional contact problems for aircraft tires. A Space
Shuttle nose-gear tire is modeled using a two-dimensional laminated anisotropic shell theory which includes the
effects of variations in material and geometric parameters, transverse-shear deformation, and geometric nonlinearities.
Contact conditions are incorporated into the formulation by using a perturbed Lagrangian approach with the funda-
mental unknowns consisting of the stress resultants, the generalized displacements, and the Lagrange multipliers asso-
ciated with both contact and friction conditions. The contact-friction algorithm is based on a modified Coulomb
friction law. A modified two-field, mixed-variational principle is used to obtain elemental arrays. This modification
consists of augmenting the functional of that principle by two terms: the Lagrange multiplier vector associated with
normal and tangential node contact-load intensities and a regularization term that is quadratic in the Lagrange multi-
plier vector. These capabilities and computational features are incorporated into an in-house computer code. Experi-
mental measurements were taken to define the response of the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire to inflation-pressure loads
and to inflation-pressure loads combined with normal static loads against a rigid flat plate. These experimental results
describe the meridional growth of the tire cross section caused by inflation loading, the static load-deflection character-
istics of the tire, the geometry of the tire footprint under static loading conditions, and the normal and tangential load-
intensity disu'ibutions in the tire footprint for the various static vertical-loading conditions. Numerical results were
obtained for the Space Shuttle nose-gear tire subjected to inflation pressure loads and combined inflation pressure and
contact loads against a rigid flat plate. The experimental measurements and the numerical results are compared.
14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF PAGES
Finite elements; Frictional contact; Nose-gear; Shell theory; Shuttle; Tire modeling 55
16. PRICE CODE
A04
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std, Z39-18
298-102



=== PDF PAGE 61 ===




=== PDF PAGE 62 ===

